Foreword
========

**by​ Guido Scorza**

Once upon a time, there was traditional advertising.

On one hand a brand, product, service, maybe even a celebrity acting as their
ambassador, placing their notoriety at the service of advertisers. On the other
hand a huge, heterogenous audience, made up of tens or even hundreds of millions
of people the ads were targeted to, in the hopes of breaking through to even a
small percentage of them, in order to convince them to buy that product or
service or to simply retain their loyalty to an already famous brand.

Street signs, newspapers, radio and TV were the main channels for this form of
advertising, its mass vehicles. They were able to make the same advertising
message accessible to a diverse and unsegmented audience.

Then came the Internet and everything – or at least a lot - changed.

The goal of promotional communication is of course still the same: to influence
purchasing behaviors of users and consumers, inducing them to buy the
advertisers’ products and services.

However, the tools at their disposal and at that of the advertising industry
have evolved extraordinarily.

The impact of the Internet and, in general, of the digital world on advertising
has likely been more significant than their impact on any other field.

Generalized advertising is now a thing of the past - messages targeting all
users and consumers indistinctly in the hopes of gaining the interest of a small
percentage of buyers do not work anymore. In its place, targeted advertising is
now more successful, as is profiling: ad-hoc messaging for specific groups of
users and consumers.

Advertisers no longer consider what would work on the average consumer for the
promotion of a coffee brand, and they no longer promote coffee to those who only
consume tea or barley.

Nowadays, in order to promote a product or services, it is essential to choose
forms, content and people that can catch the attention of a more specific target
of consumers; different messages, different ambassadors, different language
registers are all used for the same product or service.

Before sharing a promotional message, it is therefore essential to get to know
the end user and consumer individually, profiling them to better understand the
key elements that guide their purchasing behaviors. It is even important to
learn about their weaknesses, the areas where they can be more easily influenced
and their purchasing behaviors are more pliable – although it is unlikely that
advertisers would talk about their activities in these terms.

Everything has changed.

Until only a few decades ago, the industry was controlled by a few experts in
market research, a select few creative geniuses and well known – or even
extremely well known – faces. Now, it is firmly in the hands of an incredibly
small number of digital platforms with significant IT content; tens of thousands
of mathematicians, physicists, data scientists, philosophers and psychologists
as well as a large, potentially infinite army of Influencers. They are the main
characters in this book: new ambassadors that are extremely different from their
predecessors in terms of their profiles and their characteristics.

You could check Google Trend – Google’s service that helps record and tally all
searches performed by users from across the world – for the word “Influencer”.

Up until mid 2016, you will notice the trendline is as flat as a lake, then it
reports a sharp increase, like the tallest mountain.

It is clear that this is an extraordinary global phenomenon, which is perhaps
less transient than many other phenomena that have occurred within the digital
world.

And who are these Influencers?

Why are they so significantly at the core of the advertising industry?

How have they managed to usurp the celebrities of the past, or at least most of
them, except perhaps for those who were quick enough to transform into
Influencers?

This book will paint the profile of this new profession – even though not all
Influencers necessarily do it professionally, several of the main ones certainly
do.

This is one of the main positives of this book.

It does not take anything for granted, either when analyzing and describing the
phenomenon or when describing its regulatory framework of reference.

The book is useful both for those who simply want to learn more about this
relatively new phenomenon, which is certainly significant within the digital
ecosystem of Influencer marketing, as well as for those who want to understand
their legislative profile and rules.

Its purpose is to serve as an introduction to the topic, as well as at the same
time, to compile useful notions for those who are eager to learn more about the
phenomenon and its regulation.

It is a simple book, which of course does not mean simplistic or devoid of
content – it is simply made accessible and clear to all users.

This is likely one of its most precious added values.

There are thousands of legal texts about advertising, surreptitious advertising,
rights of personal portrayal (especially in the case of celebrities), unfair
competition or trademark protection. They represent an invaluable knowledge
resource, often authored by the most talented jurists in the country. This book
does not intend to replace such a source, but rather to add to it.

There are only a few books about a phenomenon that is so new, both from a
financial, social and legal standpoint. Such a book cannot aim to become a
guide, because there are no absolute truths to tell, explain, or put at the
center of a scientific dialogue. However there are indeed several thoughts to
share, business practices to highlight, approaches for old problems now taking
new guises to suggest.

So whether you are an Influencer or aspire to become one, or you are their
agent, a lawyer practicing in advertising or in the digital world, or working
within a marketing company, the authors believe this book will benefit you
regardless.
