Introduction
============

“*At first, marketing was similar to a catalog listing product functions. Once
the press was introduced, the focus was exclusively on newspapers. Then, in the
era of radio, companies were creating and investing in proper radio shows, such
as “brought by Procter & Gamble”. Television was an explosive innovation, as
companies were attracted to its significant visual component. Now we have
integrated communication, but I think that none of the “old” media should be
foregone. It is simply important to find the right media mix balance and yes –
today, this means giving way to the digital realm.”*[^1]

[^1]: P. Samuelson, "Digital Media and the Law", in Communication of the ACM,
October, 1991, v. 34, 10, 23.

Philip Kolter’s words taught us the idea of “old media” and “new media”, with
the latter now mainly consisting of online platforms, social networks, blogs and
apps as well as, more in general, the digital world.

It is important to consider that new media mainly represent a comprehensive
overview of all previous iterations – press, radio and TV – and that digital
content represents a form of communication that is more immediate, but also more
difficult to protect.

The Internet taking off made it possible for digital works to be shared more
quickly, which in turn allowed for significant savings in both time and money.

Nowadays, products and services are mainly promoted online.

We are now seeing new business models and new forms of marketing communication,
which influence consumer choices. These go hand in hand with new forms of
advertising, such as social media posts.

Advertising and brand endorsements by entertainment and sports celebrities
represent a significant competitive advantage for the owners of those brands, as
they can help build and develop consumer trust and appreciation. Nowadays,
consumers tend to consider other consumers’ product reviews more reliable than
more traditional advertising channels.

This phenomenon first arose in the USA, but it subsequently spread globally - it
is known as Celebrity Marketing, which peaked through the development of an
information society.

The definition of information society includes all the technological innovations
that significantly changed the way we communicate or learn information, based on
a few key concepts:

-   *ease of replication.* The technology used to create, view and use digital
    works allows for the reproduction of an infinite number of identical copies
    of the original;

-   *ease of transmission and multiple use.* IT networks potentially allow users
    to copy and plagiarize those works, developing fast and massive
    distribution.

-   *plasticity of digital media.* Through digital formats, users can easily
    edit or adapt works by using any technological tools available (a large
    portion of social media content is now created on smartphones);

-   *equivalence of works in digital form*. All works use the same IT language,
    therefore it is quite easy to assemble digital works and create new works by
    collating and editing existing ones;

-   *compactness of works in digital form*. For example, this allows for an
    entire collection of works to fit on a USB drive, or in immaterial cloud
    space, as well as on easily accessible digital platforms such as social
    media;

-   *new search and link capabilities*. The online space facilitates connections
    between websites, social media and digital platforms, supporting information
    exchange and allowing users to carry out in-depth searches in a reasonably
    short time.

It is interesting to note that the concept of information society, which was
developed in the 70s, keeps changing.

The rapid development of the digital world and social media has revolutionized
our way of life, allowing us to always be “connected”.

According to research by Global Digital, while in 2004 we would check our phones
9 times per hour, now we do so 15 times, meaning once every 3-4 minutes.

According to further research, we spend about 6 hours and 8 minutes browsing the
Internet every day, of which almost 2 hours on social media alone. That is
exactly twice as much as we used to do in previous years.

We should also note that the number of Internet-connected users is now over 4.5
billion (about 60% of the total world population) and that 3.8 billion people
regularly use social media.
