Il fenomeno dell'Influencer Marketing
=====================================

The success of Influencer Marketing
-----------------------------------

How important is credibility on social media? Very much so.

Influencers nowadays aren’t only public personalities supported by their
followers, but actual marketing vehicles bridging the gap between consumers and
companies.

And they are the fastest and most powerful vehicle at that. That is why being
credible is important: to be “influential”, Influencers must first and foremost
be credible.

But let us start at the beginning.

Social media contributed to eliminating physical barriers between people,
allowing everyone to immediately interact with everyone else from across the
world; however, they also revolutionized the relationship between people and
companies.

You might call them Influencers, Content Creators or Talent, but nonetheless,
they are individuals who indirectly influence other people’s choices in a very
real way, using their experience and direct endorsement of the product or
service they are sponsoring to sway their audience.

With the evolution of pop culture, the phenomenon of Influencer Marketing began
developing alongside Celebrity Marketing, making its way with brand new rules
and opportunities.

The concept of what an Influencer is or does is flexible, and it evolves as
social and economic dynamics change; Influencers are a very heterogeneous
category and they respond to market demands in different ways.

Influencer Marketing can be defined as a form of marketing based on the
influence common people who gained web notoriety have in certain industries,
mainly through social media.

Currently, Italian law doesn’t provide a proper legal definition of Influencer
Marketing, nor of Influencer.

The Self-Regulatory Institute for Advertising (Istituto di Autodisciplina
Pubblicitaria, IAP) defines Influencers as “subjects who are able to influence
consumers in their choice of a product or their opinion of a brand.”

The Italian Antitrust Authority (Autorità Garante per la Concorrenza e del
Mercato, AGCM) also provides its own definition of the Influencer Marketing
phenomenon, which consists in the “posting on blogs, vlogs and social media
platforms (such as Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, YouTube, Snapchat, Myspace) of
photos, videos and comments by bloggers and Influencers (i.e. well-known online
personalities, who have large numbers of followers), sharing their support or
endorsement of specific brands, in turn generating an advertising effect,
without clearly and unequivocally disclosing to consumers the marketing purpose
of their communication.”

However, it is important to specify that not all Influencers have the same
influence on consumer choices. That is to say that having an open social media
profile, creating content and self-identifying as an Influencer is not enough to
truly affect other people’s choices.

In general, as the word itself would suggest, these individuals can “move the
masses”, meaning they have the ability to influence their audience of reference
(i.e. their followers) in their purchasing decisions and opinion of a brand over
another. That is possible because of the trust Influencers build with their
followers, which in turn then transfers to the products and services the former
endorse to their audience. This is a wider version of word of mouth, because it
targets an entire audience of users, which can often be very large.

Users choose to follow a specific profile not because of the brands each
Influencer sponsors, but because of the stories they share, which make
everything real and compelling.

Influencers often integrate advertising within their content, which ranges from
excerpts of their daily lives to singing reels, training, recipes and much more.
Each Content Creator chooses their own style, their own way of communicating and
the main theme their storytelling will revolve around; this allows them to
organically gain followers who also represent a specific niche of consumers.

We could compare followers to diligent viewers of a specific TV show which
employs traditional product placement. These are sponsored products, which are
placed within the existing narrative structure (movie, TV show, music video,
etc.) in an apparently natural way, in exchange for compensation.

For instance, we could mention several examples of Gucci, Prada, Dolce&Gabbana,
Fendi and Manolo Blahnik products being shown in the famous TV series *Sex and
the City*, or the ever-present Coca Cola can in *Breaking Bad*, or *Forrest
Gump*’s Nike shoes and so on.

Surely, many aspiring runners will have thought about buying a pair of Nike
shoes based on the famous character. And many women will have bought Fendi’s
baguette bag, inspired by Carrie from *Sex and the City*.

The same process, or a similar one, is put in place between Influencers and
their followers. This is actually much more powerful, because Content Creators
and followers develop a “virtual bond” that fosters follower loyalty, converting
them into potential buyers of all the brands the Influencer chooses to endorse.

In order not to trivialize this important concept, we have to highlight that the
Influencer macro category includes different types of subjects, which are
ideally and conventionally grouped in the following categories:

- MEGA INFLUENCERS, i.e. celebrities that are well-known and beloved worldwide,
whose social profiles have millions of followers and who sign contracts with
well-established companies that already have a presence on the market - usually
leaders in their industry.

- MACRO INFLUENCERS, i.e. accomplished professionals in their reference
industry, whose social profiles have more than 100,000 followers, who create and
share high-quality content related to their specific industry;

- MICRO INFLUENCERS, i.e. individuals whose social profiles showcase a specific
market niche, and who have more than 10,000 followers;

- NANO INFLUENCERS, i.e. individuals whose profiles have more than 1,000
followers.

However, it’s important to highlight that a profile’s number of followers is
certainly relevant, but the most crucial benchmark is represented by its
engagement rate, i.e. the percentage ratio between the number of interactions on
each post and the number of views of that post. A large fan base is
representative of a profile’s potential to reach many people, but it would not
constitute a guarantee of its actual reach.

When considering sponsorships and endorsements, conversion rates are even more
important, i.e. the number of users who see the sponsored content and make the
action which was pre-determined as the parameter that would be used to assess
the return on investment; for instance, they purchase the sponsored product
through an affiliate link included in the post (which on Instagram would be the
so-called “swipe-up link”).

By this measure, an Influencer with millions of followers might not have a high
conversion rate and vice-versa. Conversion rates depend on the level of trust
the followers have in the Influencer they follow. Therefore, some Micro
Influencers might have a higher conversion rate because they are more effective
in communicating with their followers, or more outspoken about a specific topic.

Endorsements
------------

The concept of endorsement pertains to the phenomenon of Influencer Marketing.

In politics, an endorsement is the explicit support expressed in favor of a
person, a policy or a law, a stance that is communicated through an official
statement to the press and media.

In the field of digital marketing communication, endorsements represent a form
of accreditation of a product, brand or service, by subjects that are able to
influence the purchasing behaviors of consumers, both in terms of their choice
of products and of their positive opinion of a brand.

The term “endorsement” is used to indicate the exclusive contractual
relationship between a particularly famous professional who is well-known within
a specific industry (endorser) and the products sold by a specific company
(endorsee).

Endorser and endorsee enter into an exclusive endorsement agreement, through
which the former commits to solely using the latter’s products within their
professional activity, by providing a license for use of their image for the
purposes of promotion of such products.

In order for the contract to fulfil its purpose, the promoted product needs to
be part of the same industry the endorser operates in, which represents the
industry in which the Influencer has found popularity among their followers.

The endorsement will be more effective the wider the endorser’s audience, i.e.
the more able the Influencer is to increase the visibility of the products and
services they are supporting. This ties back to our statements about
credibility. The more credible the Influencer is in their daily activities on
social media, the more intense and profitable the endorsement.

Examples of endorsers might be professional sportspeople promoting activewear,
chefs promoting kitchen tools and musicians promoting musical instruments,
microphones, speakers, etc.

Such contractual relationship, which is new and one of its kind, is not
explicitly mentioned or regulated by Italian law; it represents an “atypical
contract” as defined by lawyers in accordance with Article 132 of the Italian
Civil Code.[^1]

This means that, within the terms set forth by law, Company and Influencer will
be free to decide on the contents of the agreement.

The atypical nature of the relationship is advantageous as it allows for a
customized contractual relationship to be tailored to each specific case
according to the related individual needs; it also allows for ample margins for
negotiation of the agreement’s contents.

If we may adapt a famous quote to our example, we could say “With great freedom
comes great responsibility” – i.e. the freedom to operate as one pleases, and
the lack of strict rules to operate within, requires that close attention is
paid to the contents of a contract.

Essentially, it is important to carefully think through each contract clause and
assess all the elements at play as well as their consequences, taking into
account all interests as to establish a balanced contractual relationship
between the parties.

One of the clauses endorsees often request is exclusivity, i.e. the Influencer’s
commitment not to use products or services of a competitor brand for a set
period of time, which is also negotiated by the parties, and which can be equal
to or greater than the duration of the contract.

Within the contract itself, ancillary provisions are often added to the main
ones, such as the endorser’s participation in one or more events planned by the
company to promote the brand and the sharing of promotional posts on the
endorser’s social channels, which must comply with the transparency regulations
and the advertising campaign transparency we will discuss further in following
chapters.

The endorsement contract therefore represents a form of sponsorship, which
presents the above-described characteristics.

Such sponsorship - also an atypical contract - represents the macro category
which includes endorsement contracts and in general, the promotion of products
and services that might belong to different sectors than the ones the Influencer
operates professionally within. We might for instance name the case of a soccer
player sponsoring a fashion brand, or a Content Creator sponsoring a car and a
marketing consultant sponsoring a line of jewelry – the examples are many and
varied.

Following are some essential elements that should be considered when negotiating
a sponsoring contract and, in particular, an endorsement contract between the
Influencer and the owner of the brand subject of the promotion.

The final contract will establish a legal relationship, created ad hoc for the
specific situation, as well as balance the sometimes contrasting interests of
Influencer and brand owner. Such elements are:

- OBJECT: an indication of products and the brand to be advertised, and of the
type and quantity of content to share. It is important to set the desired
requirements exactly, i.e. the types of services and activities required by the
endorser, the content to post, the channels used, etc.

- DURATION:  the start and end dates of the contract, or the period of validity
of the contract, as well as the indication of the project’s timeline and related
deadlines; in general, any relevant date for the project (such as the shoot or
event date, the content approval deadline for the brand, the content posting day
for the Influencer, etc.)

- MODE OF PERFORMANCE OF THE CONTRACT: indication of the potential power of
review and approval of the material produced before publication by the brand, as
well as definition of the criteria for assessing the campaign performance.

- RIGHTS OF PERSONAL PORTRAYAL: concession by the Influencer of the rights of
personal portrayal for the promotion of the brand, as well as definition of the
geographical scope for the duration of the contract (the scope of concession of
such rights will depend on each specific case.)   

- EXCLUSIVE (potential): indication of the time, geographical and merchandising
limitations and any blacklisting of competitor brands with which the Influencer
is not allowed to enter into contracts.

- INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS: indication by the owner of such rights over the
branded content subject to the contract.  

- COMPENSATION: financial compensation, which is set or subject to royalties,
which the brand will pay the Influencer, with an indication of the payment modes
and terms, or a simple provision of products needed for the creation of
content.  

- ADDITIONAL INFLUENCER OBLIGATIONS: for instance a commitment to complying
with the rules set by the IAP and the application of advertising regulations,
including but not limited to the hashtags needed to disclose the promotional
nature of the relevant content (the Company is required to choose commercial
hashtags and/or official tags and captions the endorser will have to include in
each post at the time of sharing); the contractual need to adhere to guidelines
set by communication regulatory authorities, such as AGCM, and the Influencer’s
liability in the instance of non-fulfilment; acceptance of the code of conduct
set by the brand owner.

- PRIVACY: prohibition from divulging the contents of the contract and private
information discovered during the course and performance of the contract itself.

- EXPRESS TERMINATION CLAUSE: clause which provides for the automatic
termination of the contract in the instance that one of the parties fails to
fulfil any specific provisions of the clause itself (regulated by Article 1456
of the Italian Civil Code[^2].

- PENAL CLAUSE: conventional ex-ante quantification of the compensation for
damage owed by the unfulfilling party to the other party, without the need for
the latter to prove the exact amount of the damage; it can refer to one or more
obligations provided for by the contract. 

- PERSONAL DATA PROTECTION: statement by the brand owner of their intention to
comply with national (Legislative Decree No. 96/2003) and European  (EU
Regulation No. 679/2016) regulations concerning the Influencer’s personal data
protection. Such regulations apply as the Influencer is a natural person with
the right to receive their data protection policy, even in the instance they are
represented by an agency. The topic of privacy is very important for this
industry and paying close attention to its regulation is essential, even as it
applies between the agency and the brand.

The contract parties, in performing the advertising operation, will be required
to not only adhere to the provisions of the agreed-upon contractual clauses, but
also to the so-called “protection obligations”, which include the principles of
fairness and good faith provided for by Articles 1175 and 1375 of the Italian
Civil Code.[^3]

Once the main characteristics of the endorsement contract are outlined, it is
important to highlight that this phenomenon is constantly evolving.

“All of us are someone’s Influencer” – and this is how the concept of
endorsement has expanded from its original areas of Celebrity Marketing and
Influencer Marketing. In particular, its new frontier is represented by users
and consumers operating on the web, who share their own experience about a
specific product/service, contributing through word of mouth to improving its
related brand awareness and brand reputation.

This can happen either spontaneously – in which case this would not be a
contractually-binding endorsement – or through campaigns launched by Influencers
within specific endorsement contracts, which for instance require them to share
content using campaign and brand hashtags.

Not all forms of expression related to a product or brand represent examples of
marketing communication or endorsement. In the first instance, all personal
opinions, spontaneous comments and suggestions published by Bloggers and
Influencers represent a form of free expression and thought, which is protected
by Article 21 of the Italian Constitution[^4].

The second instance, however, does fall within the area of endorsements, but a
specific law regulating such evolution of the phenomenon does not exist yet; in
light of the fast and exponential development of such modes of communication and
advertising, we hope that unified and accessible regulations will be implemented
nationally and internationally.

The contract between TikTok and Influencers 
--------------------------------------------

A specific example of an endorsement agreement between a Company and an
Influencer is the case of TikTok.

Currently, this is one of the most downloaded apps. According to the “Digital
2021” report, active monthly users on the app amount to 5.4 million in Italy,
and over 689 million worldwide.

Furthermore, a billion videos are viewed daily on the app, with users spending
an average of 52 minutes on the app. These data certainly show that it is worth
carefully considering the contracts binding successful TikTokers and the
platform.

It is interesting to analyze the contents of the agreements binding Influencers
and the multi-million platform, in order to understand the rights that are
subject to protection and the ways relationships among the parties are
regulated.

Such contracts do not only regulate the rights of personal portrayal, but also
the platform’s own use of materials uploaded by users.

Following, we will list the key elements that are included in each contract with
TikTok, provided that each individual Influencer can of course also request ad
hoc provisions.

The contract must firstly include the start date of the contractual
relationship, the duration of the license – i.e. the period within which TikTok
can use the Talent’s content – and the indication of any specific fees payable
to the Talent.

It must be specified that copyrights over the content posted are owned by the
TikToker, but the platform does reserve the right to use such content, even
partially or with different editing. For instance, TikTok is allowed to use
single frames of each video, export audio or video segments and combine them
with content produced by other Content Creators, superimpose text, images,
videos, audio fragments or tracks to the content, create memes, etc.

The only limitation the platform must adhere to is its inability to render the
TikToker’s content unrecognizable or to change it in a manner that violates the
Talent’s image, name, honor and identity.

The TikToker and the platform will subsequently set the time and space scope of
such free use of the content by TikTok – for instance, they might agree on
“worldwide” use of the content, but for a limited period of 2 years.

It is important to note that TikTok has no obligation to use such content, but
it does have the right to do so; therefore TikTok will be able to decide at
their own discretion whether to use it or not.

Furthermore, TikTokers guarantee the platform that they legitimately own their
accounts and they exclusively own the copyright over the entirety of contents
covered by the endorsement contract, without any need for third-party approval
before entering into such contract. TikTokers also guarantee the platform that
such content does not violate third party rights, whether concerning trademarks,
copyright or confidential information.

By adhering to best practices, especially in the international context, through
the agreement the parties must select both the applicable law and the court with
jurisdiction in case of a legal dispute.

Usually, the platform recommends the use of USA law as applicable law and
international arbitration headquartered in the USA as a means of settling
international disputes. Such aspects should not be overlooked as in the instance
of a dispute, such as due to a breach of contract by one of the parties, foreign
TikTokers will have to resort to arbitration in the USA, and face all related
consequences (choice of an American defense team, use of English in all acts
related to the legal proceedings, significant related costs, etc.). In order to
ensure contractual balance, it is indeed preferable to negotiate a clause
providing for alternatives to the applicable law and court with jurisdiction
suggested by the platform.  

Another element that should not be overlooked is the protection of the
TikToker’s personal data, as they relate to a natural person. Should they be
established or resident in Italy, EU Regulation No. 679/2016 applies, despite
TikTok’s headquarters being located outside the EU. As the Data Owner for all
intents and purposes, TikTok is subject to several obligations, including but
not limited to reporting obligations, towards the data subject. 

Last but not least, it is important to consider that not all contracts with
TikTok are easily negotiable and therefore, seeking legal advice from a trusted
advisor is essential for the protection of one’s own rights and creative
content.

[1]: Article 1322 of the Italian Civil Code: “The parties can
freely determine the contents of the contract within the limits provided for by
law and corporate regulations. The parties can also enter into types of
contracts that are not specifically regulated, provided that they are aimed at
realizing interests that are worthy of protection according to the law.”

[2]: Article 1456 of the Italian Civil Code: “The contracting
parties can expressly agree that the contract will be automatically terminated
should there be a breach of a specified obligation and its set requirements. In
this case, termination happens when the interested party states to the other
party the intention to take advantage of the termination clause.”

[3]: Article 1175 of the Italian Civil Code: “The debtor and
creditor have a duty to behave with fairness.”. Article 1375 of the Italian Civil Code: “The contract must be performed in
good faith.”

[4]: Article 21, paragraph 1, Italian Constitution: “Anyone has the
right to freely express their thoughts in speech, writing, or any other form of
communication.”
