Influencers and Privacy
=======================

Enforcement of personal data processing regulations in Influencer Marketing
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The main legal themes in the field of Influencer Marketing are certainly
intellectual data protection rights and adherence to transparency and fairness
in marketing communication.

However, it is important to highlight another relevant topic: personal data
processing, which is often overlooked and underestimated.

The GDPR (General Data Protection Regulation – EU Regulation 2016/679), which
went into effect on 25/05/2016, changed the personal data processing paradigm
that had been outlined in the previous Directive 95/46/EU. In an increasingly
globalized and “connected” society, it represented the regulatory evolution that
arose from the need to protect an individual’s privacy as their prerogative.
This progressively involved more general interests as well, by attributing a
central role to personal data protection[^1].

[^1]: F. Pizzetti, La protezione dei dati personali, dalla direttiva al nuovo
regolamento: una sfida per le Autorità di controllo e una difesa per le libertà
dei moderni, in Riv. Dir. Media, 2018, 1, 10

The GDPR[^2] was transposed into Italian law through Legislative Decree
101/2018, which integrated and updated the previous Privacy Code (Legislative
Decree 196/2003). This outlines the basic principles to adhere to for personal
data processing[^3]. It is also important to mention the measures and guidelines
issued by the Watchdog Authority for the Protection of Personal Data, which
provide general rules for the correct application of the principles outlined in
the regulations.

[^2]: Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
27 April 2016 on the protection of personal data .

[^3]: Legislative Decree 196/2003 and subsequent amendments and additions,
“Personal data protection code”.

The GDPR scope of application extends to all subjects handing European citizens’
personal data. For this reason, organizations and companies – even those that
are headquartered outside European Union territory – processing data of subjects
in the EU in order to offer goods or services or to monitor their behavior, must
comply with GDPR regulations.

It seems therefore fair to conclude that Influencers and Content Creators must
also comply with European regulations for personal data processing, in the
instance that their profiles and pages collect other users’ personal data.

First and foremost, it is important to understand the definition of personal
data, which is all information relating to a person that is either identified or
identifiable, either directly or indirectly, such as: name, surname, phone
number, address and related information, online ID, or any details that might
provide information on their habits, lifestyle, personal relationships,
financial situation.[^4]

[^4]: Article 4 Paragraph 1, Item 1, EU Regulation 679/2016.

Among personal data, Article 9 of the GDPR defines the so-called special
categories of personal data, which are entitled to a more significant regulatory
protection. This category includes all information that might reveal racial or
ethnic origin, political opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, or trade
union membership, as well as data concerning health or a natural person’s sex
life or sexual orientation.[^5]

[^5]: Article 9 Paragraph 1, EU Regulation 679/2016.

It is clear that through social media, a very significant volume of personal
data is circulating, which belongs to the users of each individual platform,
including Influencers and Content Creators. By signing up, they agree to share
their data and to adhere to the conditions outlined by the policies of each
platform. The classification of such personal data, based on what is outlined in
the GDPR, might not always be so simple.

Just consider that social media are immense dashboards of accessible names,
surnames, nicknames, images and geolocations, and much more. Through comments,
photos, videos, posts, sharing and likes of content that is accessible to all,
users can provide any kind of information, as well as express their point of
view on specific issues. Some of these issues might be particularly relevant in
terms of privacy, such as for example membership to a specific political party
or sharing a specific disease or, more commonly, a food allergy. Does all this
information fall within the GDPR provisions? If the answer is yes, it is
important to understand who is affected by the regulation and who isn’t, but
especially which data is protected and according to which standards. 

It is interesting and especially useful to understand the privacy framework for
Influencers and companies signing endorsement and sponsorship contracts, as they
must pay attention within their operations in order to adhere to applicable
personal data protection regulations.

The Privacy Code provisions apply any time personal data must be processed, and
this processing is defined in the regulation as any operation or set
of operations which is performed with personal data or sets of personal data,
such as collection, recording, organization, structuring, storage, adaptation or
alteration, retrieval, consultation, use, disclosure.[^6]

[^6]: Article 4 Paragraph 1, Item 2, EU Regulation 679/2016.

The personal data processing regulation’s applicability and the classification
of privacy roles seem particularly relevant if we consider sanctions introduced
with the GDPR. Depending on the type of infringement, Article 83, Paragraphs 4
and 5 outline administrative fines up to 10 or 20 million Euros – or up 2% or 4%
of total worldwide annual turnover for companies, whichever is higher. We
mention this because in the instance of Privacy Watchdog checks, the
consequences can be relevant in terms of fines, as well as adherence to
provisions that would certainly be required. 

Influencers as Data Controllers
-------------------------------

Data protection regulations apply to Influencers, and it requires them to adhere
to it as soon as they are not acting as normal users using others’ personal data
for exclusively personal activities, instead carrying out further processing of
personal data, such as that of their followers. That is, when they start using
their followers’ information, regardless of it being provided spontaneously, for
additional activities with different purposes, and in particular this relates to
business processing.

That is the case of Content Creators collecting their followers’ personal data
in order to promote their subscription newsletters for marketing purposes, or
the case of future Brand Ambassadors who want to share such data with the
sponsored brand owner.

There are more complicated cases for Influencers and Content Creators whose
content is not the subject of a sponsorship contract or more in general of
digital marketing activities, but it is the representation of their freedom of
expression, which in some cases can translate to freedom of speech and
reporting. If it’s true that freedom of expression is a fundamental right
protected by the Constitution, it’s also true that content is significant in
order to attract followers or users on one’s overall profile or page: so-called
flames clearly represent examples of content that can become popular in the
digital world. Consider delicate topics that might even contain healthcare or
legal data: does sharing a photo from a celebrity’s recent arrest constitute
personal legal data processing? And what about sharing an anti-vaxxer post
without permission, if it states disapproval of the vaccine – does that
constitute personal healthcare data processing? The topic is perhaps more
relevant in terms of legal repercussions rather than in terms of privacy
compliance regardless of data processing.

Regardless of such doubts and debates, it is still possible to consider that
every time an Influencer sheds their natural person hat, processing data for
merely personal activities, and wears that of an individual operating within the
digital marketing field, sharing content for professional purposes, they become
a Data Controller in terms of the privacy framework.

In order for one to be a Data Controller, they don’t need to be a company or a
registered sole trader, but they simply must be a subject – a natural or legal
person, a public authority, service or body – determining, either individually
or with others, the purposes and means of the personal data processing and
processing them for purposes other than personal or domestic ones.[^7]

[^7]: Article 4 Paragraph 1, Item 7, EU Regulation 679/2016 (GDPR).

As a Data Controller, the Influencer must adhere to the essential principles
that apply to any processing: lawfulness, fairness, transparency, limitations of
purposes and preservation, data minimization, accuracy, integrity,
confidentiality and accountability.

Application of these principles provides for a number of obligations for the
Data Controller, among which the obligation to provide individuals to whom the
data refers with a clear and transparent data processing policy.

The individuals to whom the data refers – be they followers, newsletter
subscribers, subscribers to a reserved section of a website – are called Data
Subjects.

The information that must be provided to Data Subjects is categorically listed
in Article 13 of the GDPR as follows:

-   the identity and the contact details of the Controller;

-   the contact details of the Data Protection Officer, where applicable;

-   the purposes as well as the legal basis of the processing;

-   the recipients of the personal data, if any;

-   the period for which the personal data will be stored, or if that is not
    possible, the criteria used to determine that period;

-   where applicable, the fact that the Controller intends to transfer personal
    data to a non-EU country or international organization;

-   the rights of Data Subjects and their respective applications (among which
    the right of access, to rectification, to update, to limit processing, to
    opposition, to data portability, to erasure and to object to the Watchdog
    Authority for the Protection of Personal Data);

-   the existence of automated decision-making, including profiling.

Drafting of the policy must be extremely careful. In addition to pinpointing all
data fluxes and existing processing, it is important to set each processing’s
purposes and legal basis, which cannot always be consent.

Such consent comes to light when no other legal basis is applicable, such as for
instance entering into a contract with the Data Subject or adopting
pre-contractual measures upon request, compliance with a legal obligation or
exercising a legitimate interest.

Article 4 defines consent as any freely given, specific, informed and
unambiguous indication of the Data Subject’s wishes by which he or she, by a
statement or by a clear affirmative action, signifies agreement to the
processing of personal data relating to him or her. Article 7 outlines the
conditions for consent, and it specifies that the Data Subject must be able to
demonstrate that the Data Subject has consented to processing of his or her
personal data, further explaining that if the Data Subject’s consent is given in
the context of a written declaration, the request for consent shall be presented
in a manner which is clearly distinguishable from the other matters, in an
intelligible and easily accessible form, using clear and plain language.

It being understood that each case needs to be assessed individually, in general
there are three cases in which Influencers need the Data Subject’s consent in
order to proceed with the processing:

-   when the data is processed for marketing purposes, such as in the case of
    marketing communications for updates on certain content being uploaded on
    the page;

-   when the purpose of personal data processing is profiling, such as when
    one’s fanbase needs to be categorized on the basis of age or geographic
    origin;

-   when disclosing personal data with third parties, which happens very
    frequently when Influencers / Creators want to monetize the personal data of
    users visiting their pages or profiles by sharing them with companies and
    organizations (that are not sponsors or brands for specific contents).

As owners of the brand the Influencer is advertising, the Data Subject’s consent
constitutes the legal basis for marketing purposes. In short, this needs to
express free, specific, informed and unequivocable freedom expressed through
positive statement or action.[^8] Consent will need to be provided as many time
as it is needed as the processing’s legal basis; any pre-checked boxes or
implicit consent should be avoided. Furthermore, if consent represents the legal
basis, the Data Controller must be able to prove they have received such
consent. The Data Subject has a right to withdraw consent at any time, without
prejudice to the lawfulness of the processing carried out before such
withdrawal. This requires the need to implement a solution that might save and
preserve the consent given by users, as a sort of consent database. If it’s not
possible to develop one’s own database, consent solutions exist on the market,
which can be easily configured.

[^8]: Article 4 Paragraph 1, Item 11, EU Regulation 679/2016.

Privacy obligations for Influencers and companies
-------------------------------------------------

Should the Influencer’s work be more structured, there are a number of privacy
obligations they will need to comply with, specifically:

-   appointment of a Data Protection Officer under GDPR Article 28

-   appointment of a Processor under GDPR Article 29

-   maintenance of Records of processing activities under GDPR Article 30.

Data Protection Officers will process personal data on behalf of the Data
Controller for specific purposes, and they will be instructed by the Data
Controller about such purposes. Consider for example a company providing the
software used to analyze fluxes on the Influencer’s page, which also allows for
follower aggregation by gender, age and origin - such company can access the
data for maintenance and periodic updating. Or consider a marketing agency
providing a consultation service using followers’ open data. In both cases, the
Influencer must enter into a contract with such subjects (which is also called
an appointment or DPA) for data processing under GDPR Article 28.

That is not all. In the instance that the Influencer chooses to employ
associates, they will need to be authorized for data processing, as they
represent subjects processing personal data on behalf of the Data Controller –
in performing their activities, they process follower data. This might happen
for instance when one or more collaborators are in charge of answering follower
requests and comments or of handling a newsletter’s mailing list.

The Data Controller will be required to appoint managers and authorized
individuals, but they will also be required to provide specific instructions on
methods of processing.

Finally, only more structured companies need to fill out the Records of
processing activities carried out by the Data Controller (the Influencer) under
GDPR Article 30. These Records outline the processing activities carried out
under the Controller’s responsibility, and it includes: the Controller’s
information, the purposes of each processing, a description of Data Subject
categories, categories of third parties to which the personal data have been or
will be communicated, whether any data is being transferred abroad and – where
possible – the terms of erasure and safety measures applied.

In a private setting, the subjects that must fill out the Records are as
follows[^9]:

[^9]: See the FAQs on the Records of processing activities on
www.garanteprivacy.it

-   companies or organizations with at least 250 employees;

-   any Data Controllers and representatives (including companies or
    organizations with fewer than 250 employees) processing data that might pose
    a risk – even a moderate risk – for the Data Subject’s rights and freedoms;

-   any Data Controllers and representatives (including companies or
    organizations with fewer than 250 employees) processing data not
    occasionally;

-   any Data Controllers and representatives (including companies or
    organizations with fewer than 250 employees) processing special categories
    of data as outlined by GDPR Article 9 Paragraph 1, or personal data related
    to criminal convictions and offences as outlined by GDPR Article 10.

Such Records, as the result of the mapping of different types of processing
carried out within an organization, are not a requirement in the instance of a
small number of processing cases or in the instance of processing not related to
special categories of personal data.

In short, we can conclude that privacy policies that are compliant with
regulations are all but trivial, and it is important to be aware of the laws in
order to outline efficient and effective personal data processing, as it seems
that regulatory compliance cannot be an obstacle to daily activities.

Influencers as Personal Data Subjects
-------------------------------------

We have so far outlined legal requirements that Influencers – as Data
Controllers – must carry out in compliance with personal data protection laws.

It is important to remember that, as a natural person, in some situations
Influencers are also Data Subjects.

Consider for instance brand endorsements and sponsorships. In such cases, brand
owners are often big companies, and they are in charge of the Influencer’s
personal data processing.

This represents therefore a change of perspective from what was so far outlined.

In contractual relationships with brands, brand owners are also Data Controllers
and hired Influencers are Data Subjects.

Therefore, brands must provide the related policy regarding the Influencer’s
personal data processing, and Influencers will benefit from all rights existing
for the protection of natural persons in relation to personal data processing.

For these reasons, it is important not to underestimate contractual clauses
relating to personal data protection, as well as to assess the implementation of
a data processing policy.

As for brand owners, they must pay attention to the comprehensiveness of the
policy, to the correct pinpointing of the processing purposes and the related
legal bases, as well as any data transfer to extra-EU countries and the period
of data storage.

Influencers must read the policy carefully, to understand what personal data
will be processed by the brand and for how long, as well as to assess consent
carefully.

Despite it being second in order of importance compared to intellectual property
and marketing communication, privacy is very important for those who are
responsible for data processing, as well as for those whose data is the subject
of an increasing number of processing instances.
