Influencers and Intellectual Property Rights
============================================

Copyright over content published on social media
------------------------------------------------

Currently, Influencers are increasingly creating content to which copyright laws
naturally apply.

Regardless of their number of followers, the type of themes covered and the
brands sponsored, Influencers must firstly be aware of the opportunities such
laws present.

The importance of copyright is twofold. Being aware of these elements allows to
better protect one’s content, as well as ensures that other subjects’ rights are
not violated – even unwittingly.

As regards better protection, videos and photographs created by Digital Content
Creators are covered as works as they express the point of view, feelings and
creativity of their author.

Such protection is granted at the moment of creation of the work itself, without
the need for additional fulfilments. 

There are two main types of rights granted by copyright laws: moral rights and
rights of economic exploitation of the work.

In light of this, the Content Creator’s moral rights to be recognized as the
author and to claim authorship of the work, their moral rights over the
unreleased work, over the work’s integrity and to withdraw are inalienable,
undeniable and imprescriptible.

Conversely, property rights, including the right to publish, to reproduce, to
communicate, to divulge, etc. can be transferred to other subjects.

In general, both types of rights are held by the author but, sometimes, the law
provides that economic exploitation rights are held by a different subject, such
as in the instance of works created by employees within the terms of their
employment. In this instance, such rights shall directly be held by the
employer. 

Another hypothesis to be considered is the instance of Content Creators
contractually disposing of such rights over their content. For example, this is
the case of endorsement contracts according to which the company might request
the transfer of property rights over content created for the purposes of the
contract itself.

This highlights once again the importance of carefully reading contractual
formats proposed by brands and of understanding the content of clauses relating
to intellectual property. Setting out such specific clauses is an excellent tool
both for companies and Influencers in order to clearly outline the economic
exploitation rights covering content created by Influencers.

Not all photographs, however, are subject to such wide protection. They might
not meet the necessary requisites in order for them to be considered works.

According to copyright laws, so-called “simple photographs” are still subject to
protection – albeit limited.[^1]

[^1]: Article 87 Law No. 633/1941: “The images of persons or of aspects,
elements or events of natural or social life, obtained by photographic or
analogous processes, including reproductions of works of figurative art and
stills of cinematographic film, shall be considered photographs for the purposes
of this Chapter. This provision shall not apply to photographs of writings,
documents, business papers, material objects, technical drawings and similar
products.”

Videos and photographs produced and shared by Content Creators are protected
under Copyright Law, and therefore cannot be freely used, shared, edited and
distributed without the author’s agreement and specific indication, as was
stated by a recent judgement by the Rome Court related to photographs shared on
social media.[^2]

[^2]: Rome Court, Chamber specialized in business matters, judgment No.
12076/2015.

“Don’t do unto others what you don’t want done unto you.” The other side of the
coin is the need to be extremely careful so as not to violate the rights of
other Content Creators. It is important not to underestimate the actions leading
to the appropriation of content shared on social media and its sharing as if of
one’s own, especially for commercial and advertising purposes.

It would certainly be unpleasant to have to face disputes and controversies
following a careless breach of such rights.

Brands and domain names
-----------------------

Influencers are often Content Creators, but also much more.

If we take into account a holistic view of their role, it is easy to realize
that Influencers are also so much more: in many cases, they are living and
breathing brands.

For this, Italian intellectual property law offers an additional important
regulatory tool: brands.

In order to be considered an actual brand, the Influencer must firstly feature a
distinctive trait: the ability to attract the attention of their audience, to be
recognized and be different from other Influencers, who are considered true
competitors within the digital content market. 

However, brand protection is only recognized once all legal requirements are
met, specifically originality, lawfulness, distinctiveness and legitimacy.

Once it appears clear that one’s name, nickname, avatar, specific tagline etc.
meet such requirements, it is advisable to immediately proceed with registering
this distinctive trademark.

By registering a trademark, its owner has the exclusive right to use it within
the market and, as a consequence, the right to prohibit commercial use by any
other parties of identical or similar marks. This applies for 10 years, with the
option to request potentially infinite renewals of the same duration.

We have to consider two elements at this point, before proceeding with the
trademark application: the territorial scope of the protection for which one
intends to apply and the type of products and services for which one intends to
use the trademark.

In terms of territorial scope, it is possible to register a national, European
or international trademark, as well as to choose preferred countries. The amount
of tax required will of course vary in each situation.

In light of the size of the audience that can be reached through social media –
an international platform that can reach people anywhere in the world – it is
essential to choose such countries carefully.

In the countries where trademark protection is obtained, the Influencer will be
able to avail themself both of counterfeiting laws and unfair competition laws.
They will also be able to put in place a number of practices related to
detection, prevention and repression of illegal behavior by third parties
violating their trademark rights.

Once the countries are selected, the next elements to assess before moving
forward with the trademark application are the so-called product and service
classes for registration – a total of 45.

It is important to only choose the classes where one actually intends to use the
trademark – if the trademark is not used for 5 consecutive years even within one
specific individual class, it will lapse for that class, i.e. the registration
in that particular class will be revoked. Furthermore, the amount of
registration tax depends on the number of classes within which the trademark
application is made.

Trademark use is a key topic in the work of any Influencer, included in the
instance that Influencers are not the trademark owners.

We can consider for instance the brand owner companies with which they enter
into endorsement and sponsorship contracts. It is a well-established practice to
include specific clauses relating to the approved uses of a brand.

Influencers must pay the utmost attention to the content they create to promote
each brand.

They must not only adhere to the guidelines companies often set, but also ensure
that the content does not feature different or additional trademarks, especially
in the instance that these can damage the brand reputation of the sponsored
brand.

As the brands avail themselves of Influencer endorsements in order to at least
increase brand awareness, a promotional initiative could indeed cause a negative
boomerang effect on the brand’s reputation if its every aspect is not planned
and regulated. This might happen both in the instance that the guidelines on
trademark use provided by its owner are not followed, and in the instance of
behavior contrasting with the brand’s values.

More in general, with the exception of content merely representing daily life
moments, the Influencer should always be careful to ensure that their content
does not feature other trademarks and that subsequent to such inclusion of other
trademarks, to the scene represented or the message communicated, no damage is
caused to the sponsored brand’s owner.

It is even more important to pay attention to the use of another brand for
explicitly or implicitly commercial purposes, even in the instance that such use
is not regulated by a contract. In such cases, the brand owner’s consent is
always required. A significant court ruling in this matter was the
Ferrari-Philipp Plein case.[^3]

[^3]: Genoa Court, Order of 04.02.2020.

Without any specific agreement with the popular automotive company, the German
designer had shared two videos on his Instagram account: the first featured a
pair of Philipp Plein shoes, resting on the hood of a green Ferrari belonging to
the designer, whose brand was clearly showcased; the second video featured
scantily clad women washing the aforementioned car with the aforementioned shoes
resting on its hood. Once the legal proceedings were resolved, it was observed
that the shoe placement on the Ferrari car of the same color was sufficient to
indicate an association between the two brands, which in turn had unduly
benefited the designer brand and damaged the Ferrari brand. In this instance,
circumstances were clarified which, when met, indicate that the use of another
brand by an Influencer has commercial purposes rather than simply being
descriptive of an individual’s daily life.

For an accurate analysis of such measures, please refer to Chapter 4 – Case
History.  

Even though it is natural for an Influencer to share details of their daily
lives and, consequently, to show their own possessions which often feature
brands – often popular brands – it is important to distinguish between lawful
and unlawful uses.

Lawful uses are defined as those authorized by the brand owner or those that do
not have any commercial or advertising purposes or those that are merely
descriptive of the Influencer’s daily life.

It would be unlikely for an Influencer to be prevented from sharing content
relating to their daily life – for example, in which they wear an iconic branded
item of clothing that they have bought as a regular client.

Conversely, unlawful uses are those that have commercial and advertising
purposes and are created without the brand owner’s consent. This, especially in
the instance of such use within the context of a non-narrative post, often
featuring promotional captions.

It is important to also carefully consider the mention of other brands not
within each post but in the related hashtags.

Hashtags are a crucial aspect of digital communication because, by their own
nature, they are key words that can capture and hold the attention of the
audience to a trending topic.

Last but not least, Italian law, as well as more generally, European
regulations, provide for the principle of unitarity of identification elements.

This is an underlying principle, which prohibits the use as a denomination or
trading name, domain name or shop sign of elements that are identical or similar
to other brands, which might confuse consumers or lead them to think that there
is a connection with the brand owner.

It is therefore important to carefully consider social media usage of the brand,
as well as its more general online use.

Such use becomes even more relevant when the brand trades through an e-commerce
store.

It is not uncommon for Influencers to decide to invest in e-commerce stores for
products – which are generally gadgets and merchandising – targeted at their
community, so as to foster an increased sense of community and increase the
general level of engagement.

Successful e-commerce stores also often generate additional business
opportunities.

We might for instance consider co-branding initiatives establishing true
partnerships between brands owned by renowned Influencers and industry-leading
companies.

Such partnerships allow Influencers to begin operating in new sectors and to
attract new target consumers, as well as to reduce production and advertising
costs through sharing.

However, the symbolic and emotional messages communicated are often more
important than the financial aspects: when the values of both brands are
combined, brand reputation can only increase*.*

Unfair competition within digital communication law
---------------------------------------------------

The web’s positive force consisted in digitalizing distribution chains, by
deeply changing the reference scenario.

Influencers carry out their activities in a stable and ongoing manner, therefore
they can be considered as entrepreneurs for all intents and purposes. To quote
celebrated Influencer Chiara Ferragni, we might say that Influencers are true
“digital entrepreneurs”, whose work consists in interacting with their audience
and sponsoring products and events.

Therefore, contrarily to what was believed in the past, when some people would
claim that there were “no rules to follow online”, it has become much more
important for companies and Influencers to be aware of the rules of the game.

The digital market operates within the same rules as the physical market. One
thing is for sure: in the same way as “physical” entrepreneurs, financial
stakeholders operating online need to compete while closely adhering to the
rules of the free market.

The overall set of rules regulating the role of Influencers is represented by
Article 2598 and following of the Italian Civil Code, the Consumer Code
(Legislative Decree 206/2005), rules relating to protecting false and misleading
advertising (Legislative Decree 145/2007), and the Voluntary Code of Marketing
Communication Self-Regulation created by IAP.

In order to understand how the aforementioned laws intertwine, it is important
to start from the legislative basis of our legal system.

We firstly must highlight that – as provided for by Article 41 of the Italian
Constitution – freedom of commerce grants ample leeway for entrepreneurs to
carry out their business operations.

Such leeway is however regulated by law, specifically by Articles 2598 and
following of the Italian Civil Code, which sanction any so-called unfair
competition.

What is unfair competition within the physical market and how does it translate
to the online realm?

The principle at the basis of unfair competition states that, while carrying out
competition between competing entrepreneurs, taking advantage of means that do
not conform to the principles of professional fairness is prohibited.

When speaking about unfair competition, we are not only referring to the
protection of entrepreneurs’ interest not to have their market opportunities
altered because of their competitors’ unfair behaviors, but also to consumer
protection, as they must not be deceived.

Article 2598 of the Italian Civil Code outlines acts of unfair competition that
might exist on the market:

-   Using names or identification elements that might be confused with those
    used by other entrepreneurs or slavish imitation of other entrepreneurs’
    products;

-   Sharing of news discrediting the activities or products of a competitor;

-   Damaging another entrepreneur with any means that do not adhere to the
    principle of professional fairness.

Without further discussing legal regulations, it is interesting to understand
how they might apply to the digital world and, more specifically, to Influencer
Marketing.

While it is true that entrepreneurs operating on the physical market might put
in place a number of considerations in order to act fairly and transparently,
Influencers must do the same on social media platforms, carefully considering
what they post and how they do so.

For example, on the topic of negative advertising, in the past Influencers have
often shared on social media negative comments or reviews of a competitor’s
products, damaging them as a consequence. Such behavior clearly constitutes
unfair competition, which is subject to penalties in favor of the damaged
entrepreneur.

Furthermore, fake news is prevalent across the web, and it is particularly
popular on social media. Influencers’ sharing of fake news damaging another
entrepreneur certainly constitutes unlawful behavior, which is punishable.

We might take the example of an Influencer with a small following using the
identification elements of another Influencer who has a larger following, in
order to deceive people into believing they are associated with them.

The main issue concerning Influencers relates to the promotional nature of some
of their content. Often, consumers are not able to recognize promotional content
when they see it. This happens partially because Influencers are not fully aware
of (or do not fully comply with) the rules of transparency and fairness, but
partially also because the company and the Influencer do not agree beforehand on
the advertising modes by adhering to competition laws.

Understanding the difference between promotional and personal use of a brand,
which constitutes the free expression of thought under Article 21 of the Italian
Constitution, is essential in order to know which subjects must be more careful
with their content.

For instance, if a famous or unknown user shares on Instagram a photograph of
themselves wearing a specific pair of fashionable shoes, they do so in order to
promote themselves, by choosing to share their own preferences and routine with
their followers. Such user has freely bought the shoes, chosen to wear them,
taken a photograph and posted it on social media, simply because they like the
shoes. The post is not aimed at promoting the shoes, but simply at expressing
their appreciation of the product.

In other words: expressing a preference does not necessarily constitute a
promotional message, but rather it is within each subject’s freedom of
expression rights.

It is however different to write a post about a product in return for payment
(which might not necessarily be given in the form of money, but might also be a
simple gift) by the brand owner; this example constitutes an advertisement.

Companies and all subjects involved in marketing communication, including
Influencers, must adhere to fairness and transparency rules for promotional
messages targeted to their audience. It is essential for the advertisement to
always be clearly recognizable since any kind of surreptitious advertising is
prohibited[^4].

[^4]: Article 5, Legislative Decree No. 145/2007, recorded as “Transparency of
advertising”: “1. Advertisements must be clearly recognisable as such. Press
advertisements must be distinguishable from other forms of public notices, and
use graphical forms that are easily perceptible. 2. The terms "guarantee",
"guaranteed" and similar expressions may only be used if they are accompanied
with specific details of the substance of the guarantees and the formalities
relating to the guarantee offered. When the advertisement is too short to
publish these details in full, the summary reference to the substance and the
procedures for claiming against the guarantee most explicitly refer to a text
which the consumer can easily obtain, setting out all the details. 3.  All forms
of subliminal advertising are prohibited.”

The message must have truthful contents, but it also must not omit information
that, if included, would change its meaning.

In conclusion, it is possible to carry out marketing activities on social media,
and this has become the easiest, most effective and fastest route for many.

A well-made post, produced by the right Influencer and to the right audience,
can be much more penetrating than a prime time national TV advertisement – but
it’s important to follow the rules!
