Surreptitious promotional communication in Influencer Marketing
===============================================================

National laws protecting consumers 
-----------------------------------

Influencers have a true network of followers, who have their own identities and
are chosen ad hoc by companies in order to advertise a specific product.

Average age, gender, fashion and sports preferences, nationality, days and times
of highest engagement – these are only a few of the parameters used by social
media to target followers. These are the reasons companies trading in products
and services are interested in pinpointing a target audience, in order to
publicize their products.

This represents a unique opportunity for financial stakeholders, as with just a
few clicks they can choose exactly the audience they want to advertise their
promotional campaign to.

In light of these considerations, followers are simply consumers. For this
reason, the Consumer Code represents one of the main sources Influencers should
take into account, as well as companies using such promotional tool.

The Consumer Code was published through Legislative Decree No. 206 of 6
September 2005, relating to changes in existing laws regulating consumer
protection, which include most of the customer protection provisions set out by
the European Union over the previous 25 years.

The document contains 170 articles, which balance and reorder laws related to
the many events involving consumers as active or passive subjects, such as:

-   consumer information

-   commercial advertising

-   agreements signed by companies with consumers

-   sales outside business premises

-   distance contracts (by phone, fax, Internet)

-   e-commerce

-   product safety and quality

-   manufacturer responsibility

-   etc....

As regards the digital realm and, more specifically, Influencer Marketing, Title
III of the Code, recorded as “Commercial practices, advertising and other
marketing communication” is the area we are interested in.

In terms of promotional communication, the Code sets out the ban on unfair
commercial practices carried out through false advertising.

In particular, Article 20 specifies that “unfair” means “any act, omission,
course of conduct or representation, marketing communication including
advertising and marketing, by a trader, directly connected with the promotion,
sale or supply of a product to consumers.”

The Code cites “any act”, but what impact would such an act need to have on the
consumer in order for it to qualify as false advertising?

Article 18 specifies that such unfair practices must significantly impair the
consumer’s freedom of choice, causing them to make a transactional decision they
would not have made otherwise.

The scope of application of such advertising laws and their goal to protect
consumers was initially only aimed at traditional communication; however, it was
later extended to include new forms of advertising as well, such as social
media.

Currently consumers – or followers within the social media context – are not
able to distinguish between spontaneous and sponsored content, without specific
indications provided by Influencers.

Indeed, Influencers need to pay significant attention and distinguish content
that is subject to sponsorship agreements and content that only aims at (at
least apparently) sharing, spontaneously and without interests, one’s daily
life. When sharing sponsored content within their presentation of their own
daily life, Influencers must ensure to include all relevant disclosures of the
promotional nature of the content.

To do so, they should simply employ specific hashtags, which represent a
symbolic “warning sign” for followers/consumers viewing the sponsored content.

Hashtags used by Influencers to identify promotional content simply represent
the digital evolution of the so-called “commercial break announcements”, which
warned TV viewers of the *Maurizio Costanzo Show* that they were about to be
shown advertisements.

They might use \#ad, \#advertising, \#sponsor, \#sponsored, \#sponsorizzato,
among others. Hashtags must be included in a visible position, i.e. from the
beginning of the sponsored content.

Brand owners can also contractually outline the modes with which to disclose the
promotional nature of each post and of any content relating to the promotional
message, explicitly regulating every single aspect of the campaign with the
Influencer, in order to avoid any breach of the law.

The Italian Antitrust Authority (Autorità Garante della Concorrenza e del
Mercato , AGCM) outlined specific ad hoc guidelines for subjects, including
Influencers, who decide to launch promotional campaigns on social media.

AGCM is an administrative independent authority founded in October 1990, which
deals with the application of laws issued for competition and market protection.

Firstly, AGCM regulates entrepreneurial behavior, to ensure it does not damage
other competitors through unfair practices.

AGCM also safeguards agreements signed with consumers and, in general, all
unfair commercial practices carried out by companies towards consumers,
including promotional ones.

In particular, ACGM has highlighted the need for specific regulations regarding
advertising on social media.

ACGM is often required to intervene to investigate unfair advertising behaviors
on social media and sanction them as needed.

Through such activities, ACGM must remind users that advertisements need to be
clearly recognizable as such, and they often underline the general scope of the
disguised advertising ban – therefore, it must be applied even with reference to
social media communication, as Influencers must not lead their followers to
believe they are acting spontaneously and without interest, when in fact they
are promoting a brand within the scope of a sponsorship agreement. In order to
encourage maximum transparency and clarity in terms of the promotional content
of posts published by some Influencers, in July 2017 ACGM had sent moral suasion
letters both to Influencers and to 11 well-known brands, in reference to content
shared on Instagram. Recent measures taken by AGCM within the Ferretti –
Alitalia[^1 and Barilla “Pan di Stelle”[^2] cases were very
significant, and we will address them more in-depth in Chapter 4 – Case History.

Essentially, current online activities are very different from the past. The
developing digital realm requires users to always keep up with industry laws,
which are currently not enough to guarantee full protection in this area.

However, we are glad to report that over the past few years, positive and
significant initiatives have taken place, specifically within industry
organizations and associations, aimed at ad hoc bridging the gap of lacking
national regulations with erga omnes effectiveness.

Code of Marketing Communication Self-Regulation and the eDigital Chart 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Consumer Code overall regulates relationships between companies and
consumers.

AGCM is in charge of ensuring its correct application, even concerning
promotional activities carried out by Influencers.

The relationships between Influencers, companies and consumers (followers) are
also regulated by the Code of Marketing Communication Self-Regulation, as well
as by the Digital Chart.

What do they regulate? When are they applicable? And what happens in the
instance of a breach?

These are only a few of the questions we will address here.

The Code of Marketing Communication Self-Regulation, now in its 68th iteration,
was issued on 9 February 2021 and is a code of conduct adopted by the
Self-Regulatory Institute for Advertising (Istituto di Autodisciplina
Pubblicitaria, IAP).

Such codes of conduct, as outlined by the Consumer Code, can be implemented by
business and professional associations and organizations, “in relation to one or
more commercial practices or one or more specific business sectors”[^3]
and they define companies’ and professionals’ behaviors, who in turn commit to
adhering to them.

This clarifies that codes of conduct are implemented voluntarily.

In general, the IAP’s Code of Self-Regulation applies to all users, agencies,
advertising and marketing consultants, managers of any promotional tools and
anybody who “has accepted the Code directly or by membership of an association,
or through an agreement to execute marketing communication […]”[^4].

IAP’s Code of Self-Regulation applies within Influencer Marketing to all
associated companies which, in turn, request that Influencers adhere through
sponsorship and endorsement contracts to the Code, Self-Regulation Regulations,
decisions made by the Jury and injunctions by the Review Board.

In terms of content, Title I of the Code of Self-Regulation sets out the code of
conduct to implement. The main rules are as follows:

-   honest, truthful and fair marketing communication, which should never be
    deceitful, ambiguous or misleading for consumers;

-   mention of technical and scientific evidence and presentation of statistical
    data with limited validity;

-   explicit communication of the promotional nature of testimonials and other
    forms of accreditation of a product with such aim;

-   authenticity of testimonials and forms of accreditation of a promotional
    nature;

-   communication of compulsory guarantees with such modes that do not present
    their content as increased or different;

-   upon request from the Jury or the Review Board, ability to prove the
    truthfulness of facts, of descriptions, statements, illustrations and the
    consistency of testimonials used;

-   detectability of marketing communication as such through the adoption of the
    points set out in the Digital Chart as regards the Internet;

-   prohibition from sharing indecent, vulgar and violent messages;

-   prohibition from offending moral, civil and religious convictions;

-   respect of an individual’s dignity and prohibition of any forms of
    discrimination, including based on gender;

-   particular attention to messages targeted to children and teenagers;

-   greenwashing ban;

-   prohibition of slavish imitation of others’ communication, even when
    relating to non-competitor products;

-   prohibition from discrediting others’ product, activity or brand;

-   loyalty and non-misleading comparison with other products;

-   prohibition from causing the risk of confusion, discredit or denigration or
    to unduly benefit from others’ notoriety;

-   principle of lawfulness variability as related to marketing communication
    based on the product it refers to.

68 might seem like a high number of versions for the Code of Self-Regulation,
especially considering that these have all been issued within the past 55 years.
This data shows the value of such a tool: adapting and changing rules based on
societal evolution and technological progress.

To this end, Article 7 of the Code of Self-Regulation refers to the need for
marketing communication to be detectable and it has since 2019 included the
Digital Chart, which was issued in 2016 and updated in 2017.

The Digital Chart is a litmus test indicating the appropriate modes of digital
communication, particularly as it refers to Influencer Marketing, in order to
ensure that the commercial purposes of communications carried out on social
media are clear and recognizable.

Following, we enumerate the key points of the Digital Chart Regulation. Firstly,
it reiterates that online marketing communication must ensure its promotional
purposes are made clear through relevant measures.

It also outlines specific guidelines for individual cases of marketing
communication, such as:

-   **ENDORSEMENT**: Clearly visible inclusion of one of the following options:
    “Pubblicitá/Advertising”, “Promosso da/Promoted by (brand)”, “Sponsorizzato
    da/Sponsored by (brand)”, “In collaborazione/In partnership with (brand)”
    within the first three hashtags related to a post and in each story;

-   **GIFT**: Clearly visible inclusion of disclaimers such as “product gifted
    by brand” in each post and story;

-   **VIDEO**: Inclusion of written disclaimers within the description and in
    the first scenes, in order to ensure the promotional purposes are made
    clear;  
    In the instance of streaming videos, disclaimers can also be expressed by
    voice, but they must be repeated at the beginning and at the end of the
    broadcast, as well as when products are shown;

-   **INVITATION TO ATTEND EVENTS**: Disclosure of the invitation by the
    promoting brand to an event in each post and story mentioning a product or
    the brand in relation to such event;

-   **USER-GENERATED CONTENT**: Adherence to all aforementioned guidelines;

-   **EDITORIAL CONTENT**: Clear and visible inclusion of disclaimers such as
    “Pubblicitá/Advertising”, “Promosso da/Promoted by (brand)”, “Sponsorizzato
    da/Sponsored by (brand)”, “Contenuto sponsorizzato/Sponsored content”, “Post
    sponsorizzato/Sponsored Post”, “Presentato da/Presented by (brand)”, even in
    conjunction with specific graphic tools, such as frames, text highlighting
    and shading;

-   **SPONSORED CONTENT**: Distinction, even with graphic means, from organic
    content and visible and clear inclusion of disclaimers explicitly informing
    users that the content is promotional in nature (e.g.
    “Pubblicitá/Advertising”), placed close to the sponsored search result;

-   **RECOMMENDED CONTENT**: Use of one of the following measures: indication
    that the box includes sponsored content, or indication of the brand
    name/logo next to each piece of content, with disclosure of the sponsored
    nature of the content;  
    In the instance of content developed by the party who created the widget,
    mention of the provider’s name in addition to the aforementioned guidelines;

-   **IN-APP ADVERTISING**: Sponsorship disclosure to app users;

-   **ADVERGAME**: Inclusion – at the beginning or the end of the game – of
    wording such as “Promosso da/Promoted by (brand)”, “Sponsorizzato
    da/Sponsored by (brand)”;

It is important to highlight that in order to ensure their own exemption from
liability in the instance that Influencers do not follow such regulations, brand
owners will need to ensure they have instructed Influencers on the rules they
need to follow, such as by providing a specific indication of the hashtags they
will need to use. This applies both to sponsorships and endorsements, as well as
to gifts.

Now that we are aware of the rules set by IAP to regulate both Influencer and
brand behavior, who is in charge of assessing that these are actually followed?

IAP consists of two main bodies: the Review Board, which guarantees consumers’
general interests, and the Jury, which is in charge of assessing marketing
communication submitted for review and of expressing an opinion based on the
Code of Self-Regulation.

The Jury review procedure has two main advantages: members of its bodies are
highly competent, and all relevant measures are implemented speedily.

Trade association guidelines
--------------------------------

Fashion brands tend to work with Influencers the most, in order to direct their
marketing activities. For this reason, and considering the specific nature of
the industry, the National Chamber for Italian Fashion (Camera Nazionale della
Moda Italiana, CNMI), which is the most significant body representing Italian
fashion brands, published “Guidelines and Interpretative Rules for Influencers”.

CNMI explicitly notes that such guidelines are neither binding nor does their
application ensure that users are exempt from disputes or sanctions by relevant
authorities. At the same time, they note that such guidelines might be a useful
tool to “adopt or improve internal policies with a view to support the brand’s
good faith and to mitigate liability in the instance of investigations”.

The document sets out four good practices to be implemented:

1.  Policy drafting  
    Brand owners are invited to draft policies with specific codes of conduct
    for Influencers, regulating disclosure and hashtag positioning requirements.

2.  Contract signing with the Influencer  
    Brands are invited to sign agreements with Influencers or with the agencies
    handling their image in order to ensure the use of hashtags and the policy’s
    code of conduct are binding.

3.  Reference to the policy  
    Even in the instance that it is not included in the contract, brands are
    invited to have the Influencer sign a document providing for their
    acceptance of the company policy.

4.  Influencer gifts  
    In this case, brands are invited to include a Thank You card referring once
    again to the policy, in order to ask the Influencer to include a disclaimer
    in all gift-related content, explicitly stating “Thank you [brand] for the
    gift of the [product]”.

 

[^1]: AGCM, order No. 27787/2019.

[^2]: AGCM, order No. 28167/2020.

[^3]: Article 27 bis, paragraph 1, Consumer Code.

[^4]: cf. Preliminary and General Rules, Code of Marketing
Communication Self-Regulation.
