Case History
============

In the previous chapters, we analyzed the scope within which to operate and
highlighted guidelines to follow in order to avoid any sanctions.

For this, it is essential to consider measures issued in the area of Influencer
Marketing, which express the authorities’ thoughts on the subject and offer
valuable advice for the future.

Injunctions issued by the Review Board and pronunciations issued by the Jury 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The number of cases heard by the IAP’s Review Board and Jury is increasingly
higher, particularly those relating to social media marketing communication.
Among these, we find Instagram communications violating Articles 2 and 7 of the
Code of Self-Regulation, which prohibit misleading and non-transparent
communications respectively.

Key examples are provided hereinafter.

### The Wycon Case 

On 30 May 2019, the Review Board ruled in the case of Clarissa Marchese
*(*Influencer) & Wycon (brand) following communications published on Instagram,
within which the Influencer invited her followers to visit Wycon’s Instagram
page and website, explicitly stating that they would be able to find “many nice
things, many surprises, things that have to do with my wedding.”[^1]

Subsequent Instagram stories also showed Ms Marchese promoting Wycon products
during her bachelorette party and wedding make-up sessions.

Such communications were ruled as manifestly contrary to Article 7 of the Code
of Self-Regulation, as a simple mention of the brand’s webpage was not
sufficient to disclose its promotional intent.

The ruling cited: “Such communications feature the clear promotion of products
and of the brand mentioned, however they are not sufficiently explicit and
therefore immediately recognizable as such by the audience. A simple mention of
the \@wycon_cosmetics page cannot be considered as sufficiently and
unequivocally identifying such content as arising from a commercial agreement
with the advertiser. Such promotion is furthermore evidenced by the Influencer’s
entirely-dedicated page on the Wycon website, featuring both her and her
wedding. The Digital Chart Regulation, which is explicitly mentioned in the
Code, outlines all appropriate measures to be adopted for online endorsements,
so as to meet the requirements for detectability of any promotional content. The
principle of transparency in advertising communications is aimed at ensuring the
distinction – both of form and substance – between promotional and other
content, so as to ensure that advertisements are explicit and clearly
recognizable by the audience as promotional messages, without the need for
additional interpretations. These messages must be recognized as being the
expression of biased points of view and of the business interests of the company
whose products or services are shared or mentioned.”

### The Falconeri Case

More recently on 20 October 2020, the Review Board ruled on the following
message: “Sunday in pink with \@falconeriofficial; Soft and cozy with
\@falconeriofficial cashmere; Autumn palette with \@falconeriofficial” used to
share promotional content concerning the famous brand’s cashmere
garments*.*[^2]

The case addressed an Influencer’s sharing of three Instagram posts on 10, 15
and 18 October 2020 respectively.

Once again, this constituted a breach of Article 7 of the Code of
Self-Regulation, as the promotional nature of the three posts was not
sufficiently explicit and immediately recognizable by the audience, therefore
requiring further interpretation.

The injunction stated: “The Review Board maintains that a simple mention of the
\@falconeriofficial page and hashtags \#falconeri, \#falconeridream and
\#superiorcashmere cannot be considered as sufficiently and unequivocally
identifying such content as arising from a commercial agreement with the
advertiser.”

The time elapsed between the post publication and the injunction – only 2 days
from the most recent piece of content – shows the efficacy and great value of
IAP’s procedures and rulings.

### The Miamo Skin Care Case

In another case, a popular Influencer was involved in IAP proceedings after
sharing promotional content on Instagram by the Miamo Skin Care brand on 19 July
2019, disguising it as unbiased advice. She referred to the \@miamoskincare page
and used hashtags \#10dayschallenge, \#miamoskincare and
\#iomiamoetu.[^3]

However, the Review Board did not consider such measures “as sufficiently and
unequivocally identifying such content as arising from a commercial agreement
with the advertiser” and the posts were ruled as being in breach of Article 7 of
the Code of Marketing Communication Self-Regulation.

The ruling stated: “The Digital Chart Regulation, to which Article 7 of the Code
explicitly refers, outlines all appropriate measures to be adopted for online
endorsements, so as to meet the requirements for the detectability of
promotional content. The principle of transparency in advertising communications
is aimed at ensuring the distinction – both of form and substance – between
promotional and other content, so as to ensure that advertisements are explicit
and clearly recognizable by the audience as promotional messages, without the
need for additional interpretations. These messages must be recognized as being
the expression of biased points of view and of the business interests of the
company whose products or services are shared or mentioned.”

### The Bottega Verde Case

The same ruling was faced by another Influencer, who had used a post on his
Instagram account to share marketing communications related to the Bottega Verde
Aloe Line, which depicted the professional in his bathroom with several products
perched on a shelf next to the sink. Looking into the camera, he was holding a
Sorbetto 24h face cream from the Aloe Line. Furthermore, the post stated:
“Sorbetto 24h face cream – instantly hydrates my skin. Aloe vera was my second
partner in taking care of my skin this summer. I chose the \@bottegaverde line
for its high % aloe content.”[^4]

The Review Board ruled that the instance constituted a breach of Article 7 of
the Code of Self-Regulation: “Although the contents are shared in the form of a
private story in line with Instagram’s style, the message features the clear
promotion of products and the brand mentioned, however this is not made explicit
and therefore immediately recognizable as such by the audience. The Review Board
maintains that a simple tagging of the \@bottegaverde page cannot be considered
as sufficiently and unequivocally identifying such content as arising from a
commercial agreement with the advertiser.”

### The Clinique Case

In another case, the Review Board did not believe that the use of hashtags
unequivocally identified the communication as arising from a commercial
agreement.[^5]

The case involved the Clinique brand and messages shared through an Instagram
post where the Influencer filmed some cosmetics and noted: “With my new
personalized Clinique cream! I chose the hydrating lotion and combined it with
the active concentrate for pores and uneven skin texture. You too can get your
personalized cream based on your skin type and problem area. It features three
different bases and five active concentrates, and each one has a different
color. Mine is blue. Choose now, combine them and start taking care of your
skin.”

The post linked to the \@cliniqueitalia page and, despite the use of hashtags
\#Clinique, \#CliniqueiD, \#sharemyclinique, \#OctolyFamily, the Review Board
deemed the communication to be non-transparent and therefore in breach of
Article 7 of the Code of Self-Regulation.

### The Sunsilk Case

The Sunsilk case, in which famous Influencer Chiara Nasti shared an Instagram
post (where she showed her hair under a sign that read “Sunsilk’s sparks of
light”), also featured a link to the \@sunsilkitalia page and hashtags \#sunsilk
and \#oggibrilloio. The injunction stated that such measures were “not
considered as sufficiently and unequivocally identifying such content as arising
from a commercial agreement between the blogger and the brand. Specifically,
each individual message must in itself comprehensively state its commercial
nature, as it might be used and quoted through links and sharing, which might be
completely independent from other content on the account. One of the
well-established principles of the Code of Marketing Communication
Self-Regulation - which is reiterated and expressed by the Digital Chart
guidelines as regards digital forms of marketing communication - provides that
marketing communication “should always be recognizable as such” (cf. Article 7
of the Code).[^6] This principle is essential in order to protect
transparency in promotional communications, so as to ensure the distinction –
both of form and substance – between promotional and other content, thereby
guaranteeing that advertisements are explicit and clearly recognizable by the
audience as promotional messages, without the need for additional
interpretations. This, based on their own promotional nature as the expression
of biased points of view and of the business interests of the company whose
products or services are shared or mentioned.”

### The Guerlain Case

An interesting case worth noting is the one ruled by the Jury in relation to two
posts shared on Instagram and featuring Guerlain cosmetics.[^7]

According to the Review Board, the posts constituted promotional communications
for the product and the brand mentioned, without relevant and sufficient
disclosures. Therefore, they were found to be in breach of Article 7 of the Code
of Self-Regulation. Specifically, the mention of the \@guerlain page and
hashtags \#guerlain and \#guerlainmakeup did not qualify as sufficient.

The case was brought to the Jury because the brand owner claimed that the first
post contained the hashtag \#ad next to the brand advertised, as well as the
brand itself. They also claimed that they had not commissioned the Influencer to
publish the second post – on her own accord, she had captured a scene from her
daily life, featuring some Guerlain make-up products and jewels from other
brands, all of which she was using personally rather than for brand promotion.
Furthermore, the company noted that some of the featured products were not
available on the market anymore and therefore, Guerlain would not have benefited
from a financial investment for their promotion.

However, the Jury ruled that the posts were in breach of the principle of
transparency of marketing communication, provided for by Article 7 of the Code
of Self-Regulation and reiterated by the Digital Chart online communication
guidelines, on the basis of the following grounds: “without evidence of the
non-contractual conduct of the Influencer in relation to a post shared on 30 May
2018, both posts are considered to be the subject of a working relationship and
are not sufficiently explicit, as they do not feature relevant indications of
the promotional nature of the content, as provided by article 7 of the Code.”

The measure applies “on account of the case-law established by the Jury
according to which Article 7 of the Code applies to any messages having the same
objective characteristics and the same effects of an advertising communication,
even in the instance that the subjective intentions of the parties involved are
not promotional in nature, and even in the instance that no working relationship
exists with the advertiser” so that in such cases, the existence of a working
relationship is assumed. The brand must provide sufficient evidence as to
overcome the assumption of a commercial relationship existing between the
Influencer and the owner of the advertised brand; should the evidence not be
deemed sufficient, the brand owner will be liable.

### The Fedez – Peugeot Case

In this case, the decision was made by the Jury, one of the bodies provided for
by the Code of Marketing Communication Self-Regulation”.[^8]

The facts at the basis of the legal proceedings took place during the
International Tennis Tournament in Rome - which was sponsored by the automotive
brand - where the famous artist and Influencer had filmed some clips at the
Peugeot booth. Specifically, he filmed the brand and himself in a car, talking
about its features – and then shared such clips through Instagram Stories.

“They are showing me all the new Peugeot cars that are about to come out and I’m
going to show you them too, one by one” – this is the sentence the Influencer
stated while filming the brand and then again, after getting in the car, he said
“see, you come to the International Tennis Tournament, you lock yourself in a
car on display, you turn on the seat’s massage function and you are set.”

This, without disclosing the promotional nature of his content to the audience.

The Jury stated in its ruling: “Although the messages are shared in the form of
a private story by the celebrity, they feature the clear promotion of products,
which is however not immediately recognizable as such by the audience. No
relevant measures have been put in place to identify such content as arising
from a commercial agreement between the celebrity and the brand.”

It is worth noting that in its defense, the automotive brand stated that this
was Fedez’ own initiative and that he had not previously shared such content
with the brand for approval, despite such obligation being outlined in their
agreement. Therefore, the brand claimed they had not been put in the position to
preemptively be in control of the content.

However, the Jury disagreed and confirmed Peugeot’s liability for their breach
of Article 7 of the Code of Marketing Communication Self-Regulation “due to the
significant relationship existing between the advertiser and the author of the
communications, as well as the necessary casual nature existing between the
production of the aforementioned Instagram Stories and the sponsored activity of
the advertiser in the execution of a contract between the parties. The Jury
maintains that the unlawful act arising from a breach of Article 7 of the Code
is attributable to the advertiser imposing vicarious liability for the
aforementioned act.”

It is also noted that the story taking place in the 3008 SUV was subject to an
agreement between Fedez and Peugeot and that one of such stories was created by
enlisting the automotive brand’s staff working at the booth, who were filmed by
Fedez. Therefore, it appears clear that Peugeot would have been able to
intervene in order to ensure the posted content was accurate and to stop its
posting.

Furthermore, it is also mentioned that Fedez’ initial video featured a tag
linking to Peugeot’s Instagram page, which then subsequently shared on their own
Instagram page “content featuring the artist as an episode of the
\#DriveToTennis campaign”, furthering the audience’s memory of the campaign
significantly after the 24 hours in which Instagram Stories are visible, and
expressing their approval of the artist’s actions, who therefore appears to have
acted as an auxiliary.”

Through another passage of the ruling, highlighting the fact that the content of
such communications was positive, did not feature competitor brands and the
videos equated to the contents of an advertising agreement, the decision claims
that this is sufficient to determine a material connection between advertiser
and artist. Since no measures were taken in order to “disclose the promotional
nature of the endorsement, which was not otherwise distinguishable for the
average consumer” the following ruling was issued: “Having assessed the acts and
heard the parties, and ruling exclusively against Peugeot Automobili Italia
S.p.A., the Jury maintains that the aforementioned message has a promotional
nature and intent, which is in breach of Article 7 of the Code of
Self-Regulation. Its reproduction with any means is therefore prohibited.”

AGCM and Trial Court measures
-----------------------------

ACGM and the Trial Court, Chamber Specialized in Business Matters, have often
been involved in significant decisions relating to social media advertising.

Specifically over the past few years, ACGM was among the stakeholders most
involved in raising awareness about the need for official regulations over
Influencer Marketing. They were also active in working to contrast disguised
advertising.

Promoting a brand on social media without disclosing the commercial relationship
– maybe even concealing it behind apparently spontaneous and unbiased actions -
constitutes a severe breach of Articles 22 and 23 of the Consumer Code and
Article 7 of the Code of Marketing Communication Self-Regulation, which prohibit
omissions and misleading commercial practices.

### The Ferretti – Alitalia Case

AGCM had the opportunity to outline best practices to protect consumers from
disguised advertising during the proceedings which arose from the National
Consumer Union (Unione Nazionale Consumatori)’s reporting of Aeffe and Alitalia,
as well as of 13 well-known Influencers. They had shared on their Instagram
profiles posts disproportionally (as they were not justified by a promotional
intent) featuring the Alitalia brand on garments by the famous fashion house
Alberta Ferretti, which the Influencers were wearing*.*[^9]

It is worth noting the Authority’s passage addressing the case in question: “It
is assumed that direct and indirect featuring of the Alitalia and Aeffe brands,
without the inclusion of the relevant disclaimers, could represent the
characteristics of promotional advertising, taking advantage of the
“narrative-expressive” structure of the celebrity’s daily life, shared with
fans/followers through the Influencer’s Instagram profile. It is also important
to note that the digital world is increasingly expanding, and posts, tweets,
photographs and videos shared on social media constitute tools that are often
used to share one’s world, emotionally engaging the audience of such stories.
Thereby stems the need to make the consumers aware of the promotional nature of
the messages they are seeing, especially in the instance in which this is
commissioned by the sponsored brand to the celebrity. Consumers need to be aware
that what they are seeing is not a spontaneous and unbiased sharing of the
celebrity’s daily life.”

The significant complexity of hidden messages is also addressed: “In this
industry, it is essential to ensure consumers are granted the utmost
transparency and clarity about any promotional content featured in
communications shared on social media, especially considering that hidden
marketing is particularly insidious as it removes any natural defense provided
to the audience by appropriate advertising disclosures.”

It is important to highlight that AGCM did not adopt disciplinary provisions.
However, this was simply caused by the parties involved adopting the specific
commitments the Authority deemed appropriate to rectify any potential unlawful
elements of the reported commercial practices.

These commitments must be carefully assessed, as they constitute best practices
to adhere to and, specifically, they caused Alitalia to adopt the following
measures:

-   Recommendation for all corporate functions involved “in the management of
    Influencer Marketing of a formal communication recommending the strictest
    adherence to unfair commercial practice regulations, specifically referring
    to the adoption of all necessary clauses in order to avoid any potential
    case of disguised advertising.

-   Adoption of specific guidelines “aimed at clarifying and setting codes of
    conduct Influencers need to adhere to, which will constitute part of a
    commercial cooperation agreement signed with individual Influencers. In the
    instance of a breach of such codes of conduct by the Influencers, Alitalia
    will contractually enforce graduated sanctions based on the nature and value
    of the signed agreement, exercising its discretion to quantify the sanction
    clauses which will be included in contracts signed following the adoption of
    the guidelines.”

-   Inclusion of a standard clause in co-marketing agreements “which sets out
    the obligation for commercial partners to adopt any necessary measures and
    cautions to avoid any instances of disguised advertising, as well as to
    encourage Influencers to adopt appropriate conducts. Based on such clause,
    Alitalia will adopt the following procedure: they will send an official
    warning to the commercial partner reporting the instance of malpractice in
    question and inviting them to cease and desist, as well as to more carefully
    ensure the Influencers’ compliance with the disguised advertising ban; in
    the instance the partner doin doesn’t comply, Alitalia will issue a penalty,
    which will be commensurate to the financial value of the agreement and the
    severity of the breach, reserving the right to terminate the contract in the
    more severe cases, as well as the ability to request compensation for the
    damage.”  

Aeffe’s and AGCM’s commitments were also significant.

-   Issuing of communications to attach to any gift package, written in the
    Influencer’s language. This states that: “Aeffe is committed to ensuring
    adherence to consumer and competition laws, as well as transparency
    regulations, and encourages you to do so for all communications across all
    platforms. To this end and in order to comply with AGCM regulations, we
    invite you to always disclose the free/gifted nature of all products gifted
    or loaned by our company in each post, for instance using hashtags such as
    \#suppliedbyAlbertaFerretti or \#loanedbyAlbertaFerretti or \#adv or
    \#sponsored. We remind you it is important to adhere to all indications
    outlined on [www.agcm.it](http://www.agcm.it) and www.iap.it.”

-   Issuing of a circular communication to all Influencers who received gifts in
    the past in order to “raise awareness of the importance of complying with
    transparency laws regulating online commercial policies, specifically
    referring to the Authority’s and IAP’s guidelines.”

-   Commitment within endorsement or sponsorship contracts “to bind the
    Influencer with whom the contract is signed to adhere to such regulations,
    as well as to disclose any promotional purposes of content relating to Aeffe
    and published on social media, by including the following contractual
    clauses: in the instance of the Influencer’s non-compliance, a clause
    granting Aeffe the right to request payment of a penalty from the Influencer
    amounting to at least 10% of the total amount provided for in the contract;
    a clause granting Aeffe the right to terminate the contract in accordance
    with Article 1456 of the Italian Civil Code in the instance that the
    Influencer’s non-compliance continues beyond the term indicated in the
    formal notice sent by Aeffe. This term will be a minimum of 3 days and a
    maximum of 5. It being understood that Aeffe also has the right to enforce
    the payment of an additional penalty amounting to at least 10% of the total
    amount provided for in the contract, without prejudice to any greater
    damage.”

-   Commitment to monitoring Influencer adherence to contractual obligations.

Another aspect of the case is also interesting, specifically regarding the
commitments of 13 Influencers against whom AGCM had brought proceedings.

In the instance that she would show gifted products, Alessia Marcuzzi committed
to including “on her social media profiles any relevant disclosures through the
use of hashtags such as \#prodottofornitoda+brand/\#suppliedbybrand or wording
aimed at disclosing the gifted nature of the products (such as “Thank you –
brand name – for gifting me this amazing dress” or “Guys, I’m showing you this
new lipstick I was gifted by – brand name).”

Furthermore, for the promotion of a product as commissioned by a brand, the
Influencer commits to include “any relevant disclosures such as \#advertising,
\#ad, \#sponsoredby+brandname, \#pubblicità”.

Lastly, a general commitment to communicating the values of correct advertising
“by sharing, within 20 days of the conclusion of the proceedings and for at
least 3 times during the following 12 months, on their Instagram profile and
other social media profiles, one or more posts on the importance of transparency
in advertising and of adhering to rules protecting consumers.”

Other Influencers committed to adopting the following measures: in the instance
of products gifted or loaned by Aeffe with no promotional commitments (even in
the case of provision of products from brands other than Aeffe), they committed
to “include relevant disclosures such as *\#suppliedbyAlbertaFerretti,
\#AlbertaFerrettigift, \#loanedbyAlbertaFerretti or \#fornitodaAlbertaFerretti
or \#regalatodaAlbertaFerretti*”.

In the case of a working relationship, the commitment to use disclosures such as
*“\#pubblicitàbrand, \#sponsorizzatodabrand, \#advertisingbrand,
\#inserzioneapagamentobrand*” was made.

### The Barilla “Pan di Stelle” Case

Another well-known case in which AGCM intervened is the one involving several
Micro Influencers, who shared on their Instagram profiles posts featuring
Barilla products from the Pan di Stelle line.[^10]

The order opens with a dispute for disguised advertising of Barilla products
through “two posts on the Insanitypage Instagram profile, one featuring a
close-up photograph of a tub of Pan di Stelle spread, and the other relating to
a contest, the winner of which would be awarded a free supply of Pan di Stelle
products” brought both against the company and the individual owner of the
Insanitypage Instagram profile.

The proceedings were subsequently extended to 9 additional Micro Influencers
engaged by Barilla in sharing Instagram posts featuring recipes using products
from the Pan di Stelle line.

AGCM highlights that “such practice falls within the area of Influencer
Marketing, which currently constitutes a well-established form of communication
consisting in bloggers and Influencers sharing photographs, videos and comments
on blogs, vlogs and social media (such as Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, YouTube,
Snapchat, Myspace), openly supporting and endorsing specific brands, thereby
generating a promotional effect. Such form of communications was initially
employed by celebrities, but is now spreading among a significant number of
social media users who in some cases have a relatively low number of followers”.
The proceedings were later dismissed but only in light of the parties agreeing
to specific commitments.

Once again, the Authority considered the goal to foster the creation of best
practices rather than issue sanctions.

The owner of the brand committed to the following: spreading specific guidelines
aimed at further raising awareness of the codes of conduct the Influencers will
be required to adhere to in order to ensure transparency.

Specifically, such guidelines: a) will recall the key principles of the
transparency rule for advertising, such as are practically derived from the
Authority’s and IAP’s interventions. This includes, specifically to the latter,
the Digital Chart; b) will include, among others and as hereby stated, clear
provisions related to the disclaimers that must be included in Influencers’
statements across social media profiles, in order to guarantee communication
transparency for consumers, by appropriately warning them that they are viewing
sponsored content; c) will include clear provisions in relation to the
contractual models approved by the Legal function, which shall be applied within
the relationship with Influencers and the agencies which will employ them on
behalf of Barilla; d) an excerpt of the guidelines with specific binding
provisions for Influencers will be attached to and represent an integral part of
the contracts between Barilla and Influencers and the contracts between the
agencies employed by Barilla and Influencers.”

The commitment towards Influencers directly employed by Barilla is subject to
the contractual clauses which will provide for the obligation to comply with the
guidelines, as well as “standard clauses with deterrent mechanisms (such as a
decrease in the consideration price and/or penalties and/or withdrawal of
payments) and sanctions in the instance of a breach of the aforementioned
obligation; such mechanisms will of course be applied by taking into account the
principle of reasonableness, proportionality and graduation (such as appeal,
formal notice, termination of the contract in the most severe cases) and,
therefore, will depend on specific real circumstances (such as severity of the
breach, value of the contract) and therefore, will comply with one’s own
entrepreneurial autonomy and contractual freedom.”

Whereas in the instance that the relationship is not directly established
between Barilla and the Influencer, but the latter enters into a relationship
with an agency, the commitment consists in binding the agencies to sign
contracts which provide for the obligation to adhere to the company’s
guidelines, as well as to encourage the agencies to supervise the Influencer’s
conduct. Lastly, the commitment in these cases also aims at including deterrent
mechanisms and sanctions in the instance of a breach of the aforementioned
obligations by the agency. 

The commitments made by Influencers were also precise and clear as follows.

-   Commitment to include a disclaimer in each post featuring products received
    free of charge: “in the instance that in the future, companies shall gift
    the Influencer products, with no obligation to promote them in any way, the
    Influencer commits to include hashtags such as \#suppliedbybrand or
    \#brandgift or \#fornitodabrand in each post featuring images or the mention
    of such products, or other similar wordings disclosing that the product was
    provided or gifted by the brand. Such measure will be adopted in any case
    since the communication of such measure and the acceptance of the
    commitments.”

-   Commitment to including disclaimers in posts featuring products received as
    part of a working relationship or collaboration agreement: “in the instance
    that the sharing of posts on social media is part of a working relationship
    and/or collaboration between the Influencer and the advertising companies,
    the Influencer shall include in each post the hashtags \#pubblicitàbrand or
    \#sponsorizzatodabrand or \#advertisingbrand or \#inserzioneapagamentobrand.
    Such measure will be adopted in any case following the communication of such
    measure and the acceptance of the commitments.”

-   Commitment not to reshare content selected by the advertising companies
    except as explicitly provided for by the contract with relevant obligations.

-   Commitment to communicate the values of correct advertising and transparency
    for consumer protection “by sharing, within 30 days of the communication of
    such judgment  and acceptance of commitments and for a total of at least 2
    times during the following 12 months, on their Instagram profile and/or
    other social media profiles, one post on the importance of transparency in
    advertising and of adhering to rules protecting consumers.”

### The Philip Plein – Ferrari Case

Another case to highlight is that of Influencers using a brand without the brand
owner’s prior consent. Are Influencers allowed to do so? It depends. It depends
on whether they do so for commercial purposes or with the aim to simply describe
their daily habits.

It is well known that Influencers share their private life with followers, and
therefore they are likely to feature products from other brands.

In such cases, it is important to distinguish between lawful and unlawful uses.

To this end, the Genoa Court[^11] ruling over one specific case
clearly exemplifies this distinction.

The judicial measure was issued following an appeal brought by Ferrari S.p.A.
against famous German designer Philipp Plein. The latter was accused of posting
two videos on Instagram, one featuring a pair of shoes – created and marketed by
the designer – resting on the hood of a Ferrari, with the car’s logo in the
foreground. The second video featured scantily clad young women performing a
so-called carwash of the car – with the shoes still resting on the hood of the
car, accompanied by a marketing caption in the margins.

The measure clearly defines the distinction between lawful and unlawful uses of
the brand by Influencers.

The order’s passages can be adopted as conduct guidelines in order to avoid
legal infringements.  

The Court highlights their own awareness that for the work of an Influencer “it
is essential to showcase one’s private life as well as feature consumer goods
owned by the Influencer. It is inevitable for such showcase of the Influencer’s
consumer habits to include features – and use – of the products’ trademarks.”

Following this premise, the Court defines the distinction between an
Influencer’s lawful and unlawful conduct. The use of other brands is lawful “in
the instance that it is authorized by the trademark owner; in the instance that
the images published communicate to the audience a different meaning than
promotional and marketing purposes, i.e. they are descriptive of scenes from the
Influencer’s life or that of third parties. Such lawfulness arises from an
obvious consideration, according to which the publication of daily life scenes
implies the inevitable sharing of product trademarks which are normally used by
the subject in question to fulfil the action showcased.”

In the instance that the images shared by the Influencer don’t have any other
meaning than the promotional and marketing purposes towards their followers, the
use of other brands shall be considered unlawful.

The Court also highlighted criteria to discern such promotional and marketing
purposes: “This arises when the brand’s feature: a) is accompanied by explicitly
marketing messages or captions; b) is published in a context (such as a website,
other Instagram profile or other social media platform) that is primarily aimed
at marketing communication, i.e. primarily features marketing messages  (such as
in the example in question); c) is included in images which, alone, do not have
any other meaning than the showcasing of a product for marketing purposes,
rather than simply depicting scenes from the Influencer’s life or that of third
parties.”

It appears evident that the shoe placement on the Ferrari hood does not describe
a life moment (“such moment should not include eating, resting, walking,
partying, talking, etc.”) and such feature can only “be explained as having the
purpose to promote the sale of shoes created by the designer by associating them
with the luxury vehicle hereby portrayed.”)

Additionally, for the second video featuring scantily clad young women washing a
Ferrari car, the commercial purposes can be deduced both by the caption included
in the margins of the video (“5000 U.S. \$ is the price tag for this one of a
kind sneakers which is only available at PP stores and online (..).com”) and, as
highlighted by the Court, as “it is important to note that the profile is
primarily promotional in nature and function, and it advertises the designer’s
products.”

The juxtaposition of the brand’s shoes and Ferrari is therefore considered as
unlawful and aimed at taking advantage of the latter brand’s prestigious image,
with the consequence that the unlawful act was sanctioned, prohibiting the use
of the brand and its models, as well as ordering the removal of videos and posts
from Instagram. Additionally, the designer was ordered to pay a €20,000.00
penalty for each violation or breach.

From a legal perspective, the Ferrari brand is well-known, and therefore it is
entitled to extended protection under Article 20 of the Industrial Property
Code. This means that the owner is entitled to prohibit third parties from using
in their financial marketing activities “c) a mark that is identical or similar
to the trademark registered for related and unrelated products or services, if
the trademark is well-known and if the use of the trademark, even for purposes
other than distinguishing products or services, ensures without fair reason an
unfair advantage arising from the trademark or well-known nature of the
trademark or is detrimental for the brand.” Furthermore, Article 9 (3), letter
e) of the Trademark Regulation sets out the ability for the trademark owner to
prohibit the use of the trademark, even in the instance that this is done in
business correspondence or advertising (i.e. even in the instance of no
counterfeiting).

[^1]: Review Board (IAP), Injunction No 26/19 of 30.05.2019.
[^2]: Review Board (IAP), Injunction No. 50/2020 of 19.10.2020.
[^3]: Review Board (IAP), Injunction No. 55/2019 of 27.09.2019.
[^4]: Review Board (IAP), Injunction No. 79/2018 of 24.09.2018.
[^5]: Review Board (IAP), Injunction No. 21/2019 of 13.05.2019.
[^6]: Review Board (IAP), Injunction No. 50/2108 of 31.05.2018.
[^7]: Jury (IAP), Ruling No. 58/2018 of 25.07.2018.
[^8]: Jury (IAP), Ruling No. 45/2018 of 26.06.2018.
[^9]: AGCM, Order No. 27787 of 22.05.2019.
[^10]: AGCM, Order No. 28167 of 16.03.2020.
[^11]: Genoa Court, Chamber specialized in business matters, Order No. 15949 of 30.01.2020.
