Golden Rules​
============

Professional Influencers
------------------------

The bond of trust between Influencers and their audience, the sponsorship
contracts signed with companies engaging Influencers to promote their products
by providing them with guidelines and direction, the market rules and their
limitations and so much more – these are the reasons that make Influencing an
actual profession.

In general, the activities carried out by the so-called Talent fall within the
area of self-employment, as regulated by article 2222 of the Italian Civil Code.
Of course, it all depends on how the working relationship is structured, however
if the Influencer carries out their activities genuinely as a sole trader, they
will certainly fall within the self-employment criteria.

Usually, Influencers have a contract in place with their reference agency, which
subsequently and in turn signs and complies with contracts with companies. The
agency will be entitled to an agreed-upon percentage of the remuneration earned
by the Influencer, as they will act as an intermediary.

As such and as for all respectable professions across all industries, the
Influencer’s profession needs rules and protections. For instance, this might
include collective bargaining for the sector, aimed at regulating the working
relationship with Influencers.

One of the first countries to act on the matter was Great Britain, with the
institution of the first trade union, “The Creator’s Union” in July 2020. The
association aims at setting minimum remuneration thresholds, guaranteeing fair
contractual agreements for Influencers, supporting them in their negotiations
with companies and promoting the correct use of online content.

A similar trade association, called “American Influencer Council” was founded in
the United States, which disciplines commercial practices for the digital
market, with a specific focus on Influencers.

Assoinfluencer (Associazione Italian Influencer) was founded in Italy in June
2019. This association is the single trade union existing for the sector in
Italy, and it was created with the specific goal of promoting and protecting the
newly created profession of the same name.

The main goal of the association is to protect Influencer remuneration, as well
as to build a network and provide legal advice to their members on different
topics (correct form of marketing messages, contracts, etc.)

The association recently submitted a proposal to the Labor Committee of the
Italian Chamber of Deputies (Commissione Lavoro della Camera dei Deputati),
which included a number of proposed measures aimed at protecting the Influencer
profession. One of the proposals is the introduction of legal sanctions against
the companies which own social media platforms, in the instance that fair and
transparent procedures are not put in place concerning penalties for
professional users of the social media platforms.

In conclusion, considering that as we have often heard, “social media are the
future”, there is still a legal gap to bridge in relation to the new
“Influencer” job title.

This is a dynamic, flexible and constantly evolving profession, requiring an
adequate level of protection and ad hoc tools, such as collective bargaining and
contracts regulating the entire course of the working relationship.

10 golden rules for your social media business
----------------------------------------------

1.  **THE ART OF (NOT) IMPROVISING**  
    It is important NOT to improvise your work as an Influencer, not to go with
    the flow without realizing the power and responsibilities you hold and the
    opportunities you can take advantage of. Going with the flow unaware is
    never a good idea.

2.  **KNOW THE RULES OF THE GAME**  
    It is essential to know reference regulations.  
    For companies, it would be useful to adopt and share Influencer Marketing
    Guidelines, in order to clearly set codes of conduct for Influencers, so as
    to ensure transparent communications.

3.  **TOE THE (THIN) LINE BETWEEN INSPIRATION AND PLAGIARISM**  
    DO NOT take other Content Creators’ content and post it on social media as
    if it were your own.

4.  **PROTECT YOUR BRAND**  
    Do all that is necessary to protect and showcase your immaterial assets – be
    they trademarks, domain names or social media handles.

5.  **DO NOT TAKE ADVANTAGE OF OTHERS’ BRANDS**  
    DO NOT use brands – especially well-known brands – by other subjects to lead
    consumers to believe there is a connection or association between the two
    businesses so as to obtain advantages.

6.  **NEGOTIATE YOUR CONTRACTS**  
    NEVER sign a contract without carefully reading it, going through each
    individual clause and appendix. Negotiating an endorsement contract well is
    the starting point for an effective and successful collaboration.

7.  **PACTA SUNT SERVANDA, BUT NOT ALWAYS**  
    DO NOT breach the terms agreed upon in an endorsement contract (type and
    volume of content, deadlines, exclusives, confidentiality, etc.)

8.  **TRANSPARENT ADVERTISING, IN THE RIGHT MEASURE**  
    DO NOT promote products without prior disclosure to your followers of the
    promotional purposes of such operation. Basically, always use the
    appropriate hashtag:  
    In the case of a sponsorship or collaboration, you must include some of the
    following disclaimers: *\#pubblicità(brand) \#sponsorizzatoda(brand)
    \#advertising(brand) \#ad(brand) \#sponsoredby(brand)
    \#inserzioneapagamento(brand)*;  
    If you receive gifted products, you must disclose this by using the related
    disclaimers, such as *\#prodottofornitoda(brand) \#suppliedby(brand)*

9.  **BE CAREFUL WITH VIOLATIONS**  
    Regularly check that there are no unauthorized uses of your content and
    trademarks taking place. Once you discover a breach, immediately proceed to
    request a cease and desist and compensation for the damage incurred.

10. **ENJOY YOUR BUSINESS**  
    Never lose sight of your goal, know your business and follow the rules, but
    also don’t forget that social media are about being spontaneous and
    credible. So relax and enjoy your success!
