Afterword
=========

By Giuseppe Vaciago and Matteo G.P. Flora
-----------------------------------------

In a world where avatars “come to life”, the concept of identity and Influencers
is constantly evolving, specifically in two different phases.

In the first phase, we once again see well-known faces: actors, models, sports
celebrities or entertainers who become “virtual” products and use their fame to
take to the “virtual stage”. An example of this is Travis Scott in Fortnite[^1]:
the identity of Influencers moves and expands, and as a consequence, it allows
them to use their own image for an unlimited audience. Audiences are not only
real and in real time anymore, because from DeepFakes to the Metaverse, the
possibilities of using one’s image in order to avoid having to carry out
specific actions - by creating millions of copies of the same image - are
endless. The dream of any marketing operator is to have millions of poses,
shots, pieces of content, and it is now a reality. All of it can be used to
advertise millions of products without even having the artist move.

In the second phase – which is already a reality – the concept of Influencer
becomes that of a synthetic Influencer or a virtual Influencer.

Virtual Influencers already exist and have for a while[^2], but through the
Metaverse they have flourished and become well known in a different environment,
which allows them to be more directly in touch with an audience that might have
only seen them as inanimate representations shown in photos. Interacting with a
Virtual Influencer is the new “following the life of an Influencer”, a new way
to represent a dream.

“I am from Thailand but my spirit is global, I was created at the beginning of
the pandemic and I will be 17 forever” states Naughty Boo in a video – one of
the first virtual Influencers who, through the work of a team of developers,
graphics, stylists, creatives, will certainly have a long and successful career
in the metaverse.

The short term future will necessarily have to deal with CGI (Computer Generated
Imagery) Influencers – fairly easily, they will be able to blend in with real
Influencers in a dimension that Luciano Floridi defined as “on life” in 2016.

However, while the future is fascinating and scary at the same time, we have to
take stock of the present, specifically the development of a phenomenon that
even just in Italy creates 450,000 jobs directly or indirectly, with a market
value of 280 million in 2021, and a 15% growth compared to the previous year.
Globally, the overall value is 14 billion, vs. 9.7 billion in 2020.

These are significant figures in an alienating context; so much so that John
Hanke, the creator of Pokemon Go – maybe the most successful Augmented Reality
operation – wonders about the future and without any sort of ethical scrutiny,
foresees that the Metaverse might become a “nightmare”, because of the lack of
humanity behind each experience (and “person”), as we cannot tell the real ones
and the imaginary ones apart. This is certainly not a cliché, considering that
Meta itself has developed an ethical observatory in order to draft AI and
AI-based Avatars guidelines – the “synthetic” section of Influencer Marketing
which is causing concern and should be carefully assessed[^3].

An Influencer can be all or nothing: they can be unparalleled athletes,
impossibly beautiful models or even a memory we can get lost in, such as the
daughter we lost and can meet again in the Metaverse[^4].

Which limits exist? Which regulations? Which frameworks should we build? We do
not know this, but it’s certainly time to think about it.

[1]: Visit https://www.theverge.com/2020/
4/23/21233637/travis-scott-fortnite-concert-astronomical-live- report  

[2]: Visit <https://influencermarketinghub.com/virtual-influencers/>

[3]: Visit
<https://www.facebook.com/business/news/insights/synthetic-media-signals-a-new-chapter-for-influencer-marketing>

[4]: Visit <https://futurism.com/watch-mother-reunion-deceased-child-vr>

 

 

 

 
